=== PAGE 1 ===
Character Entropy in Modern and Historical Texts: Comparison
Metrics for an Undeciphered Manuscript
Luke Lindemann and Claire Bowern
May 18, 2021
Note: This is an updated version of the article that we uploaded on October 27, 2020. For this update
we developed an improved method for extracting language text from Wikipedia, removing metadata and
wikicode, and we have rebuilt our corpus based on current wikipedia dumps. The new methodology is
described in Section 3.2, and we have updated the statistics and graphs in Section 4 and Appendices B and
D. None of our results have changed substantially, suggesting that character-level entropy was not greatly
affected by the inclusion of stray metadata. However, our forthcoming work will use these corpora for word-
levelstatisticsincludingmeasuresofrepetitionandtypetokenratio,forwhichmetadatawouldhaveamuch
greater effect on results. We also made a minor alteration to the Maximal Voynich transcription system as
described in Section 3.1.1. This also has a negligible effect on character entropy. The statistics in Section 4
and Appendix A have been updated accordingly.
Abstract
This paper outlines the creation of three corpora for multilingual comparison and analysis
of the Voynich manuscript: a corpus of Voynich texts partitioned by Currier language, scribal
hand, and transcription system, a corpus of 311 language samples compiled from Wikipedia,
and a corpus of eighteen transcribed historical texts in eight languages. These corpora will be
utilized in subsequent work by the Voynich Working Group at Yale University.
WedemonstratetheutilityofthesecorporaforstudyingcharacteristicsoftheVoynichscript
and language, with an analysis of conditional character entropy in Voynichese. We discuss the
interactionbetweencharacterentropyandlanguage,scriptsizeandtype,glyphcompositionality,
scribal conventions and abbreviations, positional character variants, and bigram frequency.
This analysis characterizes the interaction between script compositionality, character size,
and predictability. We show that substantial manipulations of glyph composition are not suf-
ficient to align conditional entropy levels with natural languages. The unusually predictable
natureoftheVoynichesescriptisnotattributabletoaparticularscriptortranscriptionsystem,
underlying language, or substitution cipher. Voynichese is distinct from every comparison text
inourcorporabecausecharacterplacementishighlyconstrainedwithintheword,andthismay
indicate the loss of phonemic distinctions from the underlying language.
Corpus materials and code are available from github.com/chirila/Voynich-public.
1

=== PAGE 2 ===
Contents
1 Introduction 3
2 Structure and Content of the Voynich Manuscript 5
3 Description of the Corpora 6
3.1 The Voynich Corpus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
3.1.1 Voynich Transcription Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3.1.2 Voynich Document Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2 The Wikipedia Corpus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2.1 Wikipedia Document Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2.2 Wikipedia Languages by Family . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.3 The Historical Corpus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.3.1 Description of the Corpus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.3.2 Historical Document Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4 Conditional Character Entropy in Voynichese 22
4.1 Character Frequency Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2 Entropy Variance and Document Length . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.3 Entropy in Voynichese . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.3.1 Character Set Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.3.2 Languages A and B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.4 Comparison to the Wikipedia Corpus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.5 Comparison to the Historical Corpus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.5.1 Parallel Diplomatic and Normalized texts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.6 What makes Voynichese unique? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.6.1 Entropy and Bigram Frequency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.6.2 Compositionality, Word-finals, and Syllable Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.6.3 Bigrams with High Conditional Probability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.7 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
A Voynich Corpus Statistics 38
B Wikipedia Corpus Statistics 39
C Historical Corpus Statistics 48
D The Sukhotin Algorithm for Vowel Detection 49
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
1 Introduction
The Voynich Manuscript (e.g. Figure 1) is an early 15th Century illustrated manuscript written
by multiple unknown scribes (Davis 2020) in an unknown cipher or language. It contains about
38,000 words of text. The Voynich alphabet, which is not found in any other known work, has
resisted nearly 110 years of modern attempts at decipherment (see Bowern and Lindemann 2020
and http://www.voynich.nu for overviews). This is despite the fact that there is clear evidence
of language-like structure in the text, at least at the paragraph level (Reddy and Knight 2011;
Amancio et al. 2013; Landini 2001).1
Figure 1: A paragraph of text and labelled figures from the “Recipes” section of the Voynich
Manuscript (f100r).
The major unsolved question of the Voynich text is whether it represents meaningful language.2
It could be a medieval hoax that is designed to look like an esoteric alchemical text, in which no
sequences of letters correspond to any meaningful words or concepts (see Rugg 2004; Timm and
Schinner 2020, amongst others). If so, the creators did an incredible job of imitating the patterns
of an authentic language text considering what was known about the structure of language at the
time. In so doing, they must have modeled their fake language after a real language that they were
familiar with, imbuing it with familiar, language-like patterns. If this is the case, it may still be
possible to take clues from the structure of Voynichese to pinpoint a language or region of origin.
We find it more likely that Voynichese does represent meaningful language, and this opens the
possibility that Voynichese may ultimately be deciphered. It is possible that the text was created
1Thanks to members of the “Mystery of the Voynich Manuscript” class at Yale for discussion of some of these
points. Division of labor: LL and CB planned the analyses; LL compiled the corpora and wrote the scripts; LL and
CB analyzed the data; LL wrote the paper with input from CB.
2In previous decades, there was the separate question of whether the manuscript is a modern hoax, i.e. a 20th
centuryforgery of a medievalmanuscript. This has been fairly decisivelydisproven bychemicalanalysis, though see
Barlow (1986) for some earlier discussion that predates the results from carbon dating.
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
to encode meaning, but the nature of the encipherment obscured it in such a way that the original
meaning is permanently irrecoverable. Even if this is the case, we may be able to glean information
about language and content with a careful analysis of Voynichese structure. Note that others,
such as Timm and Schinner (2020), argue strongly that the Voynich manuscript does not encode
meaningful text, and so cannot be compared with natural language.3
The goal of this project is to analyze the structure and patterning of the Voynich manuscript,
and to compare it to known texts. By comparing Voynichese to known languages and texts, we
reduce the set of possible hypotheses about language, origin, and the question of meaningfulness.
This paper describes the creation of text corpora for conducting experiments on the Voynich text.
Note that our aim is not to advance a strong claim about exclusive identification (of the form
“VoynicheseisHebrew”or“VoynicheseisOccitan”)butrathertoexploretherelationshipsbetween
the morphological and phonological profiles of Voynichese with a typologically broad range of
natural and constructed languages.4
We require as many examples of languages and scripts as possible in order to understand the
range of possibilities in the structure of texts. We would also like to be able to classify these texts
by language and language family in order to see whether closely related languages share aﬀinities of
structure, allowingustonarrowdowntherangeofpossiblelanguages(oratleastbetterunderstand
possible encryption processes). For this reason, our first comparison corpus consists of Wikipedia
articles written in 311 languages, representing thirty-nine language families.
The Voynich manuscript is also the product of a particular historical context. This includes
the medieval scribal traditions which produced it, as well as the herbalogical, alchemical, and as-
trological knowledge which informed its content. To take a particular relevant example, medieval
scribes made much more frequent use of abbreviations than we find in modern writing. We there-
fore include a second comparison corpus of historical manuscripts in English, Georgian, Hebrew,
Icelandic, Italian, Latin, Persian, and Spanish.
This paper consists of three sections. In Section 2, we give an overview of the structure and
content of the Voynich manuscript, focusing on what is known about the text. We give a brief
description of each section and discuss the evidence for multiple Voynich languages and scribal
hands.
In Section 3, we outline in detail the process of creating the three corpora used for this project:
the Voynich Corpus, the Wikipedia Corpus, and the Historical Corpus. We discuss the issue of
transcription in the Voynich text, and define the three transcriptions we use: Maximal, Maximal
Simplified, and Minimal.
In Section 4, we demonstrate the utility of the corpora by comparing character-level properties
3TimmandSchinner2021makethispointespeciallyforcefully,evengoingasfarasaccusingusofalackofscientific
rigorfornotfindingtheirargumentsconvincing. Whiletheaimofthispaperistomakelanguagecomparisonsacross
naturalandconstructedlanguages,ratherthantomakeargumentsaboutanyparticulartheory,wereiterateapoint
we have made several times elsewhere (including in the review article that they criticize): that Voynichese appears
unnatural only below the word level. At the level of page and paragraph, Voynichese is comparable to natural
language and structured text. This finding must be taken into account when proposing that Voynichese does not
encodemeaningfultext,asmostmethodsofcreatingmeaninglesstextwillnotexhibitthisproperty. SeeZandbergen
(2021)fordiscussionoftheCardanGrillecyphermethod,whichcouldbeusedtocreatemeaninglesstextortoencode
natural language.
4This is why we include samples of languages which are extremely unlikely to underlie the Voynich manuscript,
including Indigenous languages of the Americas and modern constructed languages. We include them not because
we think they are likely Voynichese candidates (far from it), but rather so that we can better study the interaction
of morphological and lexical typology and the statistical profiles of different languages.
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
of the Voynich manuscript with the Wikipedia and historical text samples. We discuss in detail the
unusually low conditional character entropy of Voynichese, and compare the effect that language,
script,transcriptionsystem,usageofabbreviations,andtypographicalconventionhasonthisvalue.
2 Structure and Content of the Voynich Manuscript
The Voynich manuscript contains 102 folios in its current form. There is evidence that some of the
pages have been removed and rearranged from their original ordering. There are Arabic numerals
1-116 in the top right corner of each recto folio.5 These numerals were probably not written by
the original authors, but were added at a later date. Ten of the folios fold out to reveal additional
diagrams and text, the largest of which is the “Rose,” a complex six-page foldout. See Davis (2020)
for a discussion of manuscript hands and foliation.
While the Voynich document does not appear to have section or chapter titles, it can be divided
into five sections based upon the drawings and figures in each section:6
1. The Herbal section is the first and largest section, taking up approximately half of the entire
manuscript. Each folio contains an illustration of an herb or flower. One or more paragraphs
of text are written around the illustration. There are no labels on the illustrations themselves
in this section.
2. The Cosmological section consists of circular diagrams and charts that appear to be astro-
logical in nature. Most of them include drawings of stars and stylized suns, with text written
in spirals and copious labels. A few of the characters are recognizable medieval astrological
symbols.7 There is also a twelve-page sequence of Zodiac illustrations within concentric cir-
cles of text and pictures of women with labels. In most cases, there are exactly thirty women
per illustration. The Zodiac signs are correctly ordered and have been labelled at the center
with corresponding month names in the Occitan dialect of French (which is probably a later
addition and should not be mistaken for Voynichese).8 There is less running paragraph text
in this section, but there are many labels and text written in a circular pattern.
3. The Balneological section contains pictures of what appear to be stylized women bathing in
large basins and interconnected ornamental tubes. Each folio contains multiple paragraphs
of running text, and many of the women are labelled. This is followed by the six-page Rose
5The fourteen missing folios are f12, f59, f60, f61, f62, f63, f64, f74, f91, f92, f97, f98, f109, and f110.
6For ease of reference, we have labelled sequentially coherent Section boundaries based on the current order of
the manuscript. Therefore, those pages which consist of only text (and are therefore not obviously classifiable) are
classified as part of the section in which they appear. Furthermore, the isolated Herbal pages that are found in the
Cosmology and Recipe sections are classified as part of the Cosmology and Recipe sections respectively. This differs
from the section coding schema employed by the interlinear gloss file available at http://www.voynich.nu. It is
very likely that some pages in the manuscript are now in a different order than the order in which they were first
composed.
7Thenumberofdivisionsorpointsonmanyofthesechartsalsosuggestastrologicalconcepts: twelverepresenting
the houses of the Zodiac, seven representing the planets, four representing the elements (also humors, directions,
qualities, or triplicities), eight representing the monastic hours of the day.
8Though it takes up twelve folios, the Zodiac is incomplete because it only depicts ten out of the twelve signs.
Capricorn and Aquarius, the first and last signs, are missing. Ares and Taurus are each depicted twice on separate
folios. Theirchartsdepictonlyfifteenwomen,whichsuggeststhateachfoliorepresentsahalf-month. Theonlychart
with neither thirty nor fifteen women is Gemini, which has twenty-nine.
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
foldout, which on one side depicts nine interconnected circular diagrams, many centered with
suns and containing stars or tubes. The other side contains text and more circular diagrams.
4. The Recipes section is distinguished by pages with paragraphs of text separated by assort-
ments of labelled herbs, leaves, or roots. To the left of the paragraphs there are what appear
to be ornate jars. In between these pages of “recipes” there is a central section of herbals in
the same style as the Herbal section.
5. The Stars section contains no illustrations and consists of densely packed short paragraphs
of text. Each page contains ten to twenty paragraphs which are marked on the lefthand side
by a seven-pointed star symbol.
There is evidence that more than one scribe produced the text. Currier (1976) noted the exis-
tenceofmultiplescribalhands,andhealsoclassifiedpagesofthetextintotwodifferent“languages”
(Currier Language A and B) based upon consistent and marked differences in the frequency of cer-
tain words and glyph combinations. The usage of the term “language” is misleading, because
Language A and Language B do not necessarily represent different natural languages. There are
substantial similarities of structure and vocabulary. They may represent different dialects of the
samelanguage, or theymayrepresentthe same dialect butuse a slightlydifferentencoding scheme.
With a small number exceptions, every folio is written in only one Language and Scribal Hand,
and each Scribal Hand employs only one language. This implies to us that the scribes who made
the text were also its authors. If they were copying a previous work, we should not expect to find
such a close correlation between the language and scribal hand.
The first half of the Herbal Section is written in Language A, and the second half alternates
between Languages A and B. The Balneological and Stars sections are written entirely in B. The
“recipes” of the Recipes section are all written in A, while the “herbals” in the Recipes section are
written in A or B (suggesting that it was originally part of the Herbals section). The Cosmological
section, which contains mostly labelled diagrams rather than running text, was left unclassified by
Currier, although it most closely resembles Language B.
The recent analysis of Davis (2020) demonstrates evidence for five different scribal hands based
on variations in the formation of several glyphs. She finds that Language A is written entirely by
Hand 1 (with the exception of 58r), while the other hands write in Language B. Hand 2 is found
in the second half of the Herbal section, the entire Balneological section, and thirty-three lines on
a folio in the Stars section (115r) which is shared with Hand 3. Hand 3 is found at the end of the
Herbal and Cosmological sections, the “herbal” portion of the Recipes, and every folio of the Stars
section. The Cosmological section is written almost entirely in Hand 4. Hand 5 is found only in
the second half of the Herbal section.
The amount of text written by Hands 1, 2, and 3 is approximately equal: 10-12 thousand words
each. Hands 4 and 5 are found mostly on diagram labels rather than running text, and account
for less than four thousand words between them. Overall, 87% of the Voynich text is written in
paragraphs and 13% consists of labels on diagrams or drawings.
3 Description of the Corpora
The following sections describe the corpus materials used in the current study.
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
Figure 2: Selected examples from each section of the Voynich Manuscript
Figure 3: Map of Sections, Languages (Currier 1976) and Scribal Hands (Davis 2020)
3.1 The Voynich Corpus
TheVoynichcorpusconsistsofdigitallytranscribedcopiesofthemanuscriptitself(seeSection3.1.2
below for more details on the transcription used). We also created separate documents for each
Voynich Language, Scribal Hand, and separated running text from the text found in labels and
diagrams. The Voynich corpus used for this project consists of the following documents:
7

=== PAGE 8 ===
1. Full Voynich: The entire Voynich text, including running text, labels, and diagrams.
2. Full Voynich Text: The Voynich text written in paragraphs, without text in labels and
diagrams.
3. Voynich A: Voynich written in Currier Language A, including running text, labels, and
diagrams.
4. Voynich A Text: Voynich written in Currier Language A, without text in labels and dia-
grams.
5. Voynich B: Voynich written in Currier Language B, including running text, labels, and
diagrams.
6. Voynich B Text: Voynich written in Currier Language B, without text in labels and dia-
grams.
7. Voynich 1: Voynich written in Hand 1, including running text, labels, and diagrams.
8. Voynich 1 Text: Voynich written in Hand 1, without text in labels and diagrams.
9. Voynich 2: Voynich written in Hand 2, including running text, labels, and diagrams.
10. Voynich 2 Text: Voynich written in Hand 2, without text in labels and diagrams.
11. Voynich 3: Voynich written in Hand 3, including running text, labels, and diagrams.
12. Voynich 3 Text: Voynich written in Hand 3, without text in labels and diagrams.
13. Voynich 4: Voynich written in Hand 4, including running text, labels, and diagrams.
14. Voynich 4 Text: Voynich written in Hand 4, without text in labels and diagrams.
15. Voynich 5: Voynich written in Hand 5, including running text, labels, and diagrams.
16. Voynich 5 Text: Voynich written in Hand 5, without text in labels and diagrams.
TheparticulartranscriptionsystemusedtowriteVoynichesecanhaveameasurableeffectonthe
statistical properties of the text itself. All of the documents above have been converted into three
different transcription systems: Simplified Maximal, Full Maximal, and Minimal. The important
issue of transcription is discussed in Section 3.1.1.
3.1.1 Voynich Transcription Systems
ScholarsoftheVoynichmanuscripthaveproposedseveraltranscriptionsystemstoassigncharacters
to particular Voynich glyphs. These transcription systems include FSG, Bennett, Currier, Frogguy,
EVA (Extensible Voynich Alphabet), and V101 (see Zandbergen 2010 for an overview). The most
commonly used of these systems is EVA. The systems differ in the assumptions they make about
what constitutes a single character or character variant, and these assumptions can have an effect
on the statistical properties of the text. Research on the most plausible character set is ongoing,
and therefore any analysis of Voynichese should take into account the particular assumptions of
the given transcription system.
ThemostsignificantassumptioniswhetherornotcertainsequencesofVoynichglyphsconstitute
a single character or a sequence of multiple characters. Many of these common glyph sequences
occur either word-finally or word-initially. They are written as sequences of multiple characters
in the EVA transcription system, while the earlier Currier transcription considers them to be
8

=== PAGE 9 ===
Figure 4: Glyph combinations and their Minimal and Maximal transliterations. Maximal Voynich
is equivalent to EVA,except that plumes are represented by apostrophes. For Minimal Voynich, we
have made the substitutions given above, following Currier’s schema. The last two were suggested
by Zandbergen (2010). The ee combination is very common in the middle of words. The qo
combination is almost always an initial sequence, with q being followed by o 98% of the time.
9

=== PAGE 10 ===
single characters. Transcription systems can be ranked according to whether common Voynich
glyph sequences are minimally or maximally decomposed into individual characters. The EVA
transcription was designed to be convertible to other major transcription systems.9 The characters
of EVA are therefore intended to represent a lower bound on the length of characters to allow for
the conversion to all possible compositions of characters in other systems. Whether or not EVA
makes correct assumptions, it is the most convenient transcription system for analyzing Voynich
in many cases because it allows for easy conversion into other systems. By contrast, Currier is the
most minimally decomposed transcription system of the major systems. Common glyph common
combinations tend to be represented as a single character rather than multiple characters.
We take EVA as the basis for our most decomposed system, i.e. the Maximal transcription.10
The only difference between our Maximal transcription and EVA is in the way that plumes are
transcribed. Plumes are looping strokes which are found almost exclusively above the ch bench
characters (see the example in the Initials section of Figure 3.1.1). There are seven plumes found
elsewhere in the document. In EVA,the c with a plume aboveit is written as s, and it is considered
to be the same character as the glyph s which is written with a single connected stroke and is found
without an h in words like sol. For our Maximal transcription, we want the glyphs to be as
decomposed as possible, and so we use the apostrophe character for all plumes. Thus for example
thewordwhichistranscribedasshedyinEVAistranscribedasc’hedyintheMaximaltranscription.
We consider the s written with a single unconnected stroke to be a separate character.
For a Minimal transcription, we take EVA and substitute all of the glyph combinations in
Currier’ssystem. WeaddtwoadditionalglyphcombinationsbasedonsuggestionsfromZandbergen
(2010). The differences between the Minimal and Maximal transcriptions are outlined in Figure 4.
Minimal Voynich represents our effort to create a transcription in which common glyph sequences
are minimally decomposed into multiple characters. With future research, handwriting and script
analysis will hopefully determine the plausibility of particular glyph decompositions with a higher
degree of certainty. But for the present it is useful to compare two transcription systems which
represent upper and lower bounds of compositionality.
Transcription systems also differ in the extent to which they represent ligatures and infrequent
characters. Ligatures are horizontal lines that are sometimes employed to connect two characters.
Theymaysimplybetheresultofafluentwritingstyle. ThesearedistinguishedintheFullMaximal
Transcription (and EVA) by capitalizing the first of the letters (see Figure 3.1.1).
There are sixteen characters which appear less than fifty times each in the entire manuscript.
Some of the infrequent characters are recognizable astrological symbols or are found only on cos-
mological diagrams, while others appear to be variants of other characters or even typographical
mistakes. Therearealsoabout250unreadableglyphs, whicharerepresentedinEVAbyanasterisk
symbol. Altogether, these infrequent characters account for less than 0.15% of the text.
Figure 3.1.1 demonstrates the differences between the Full Maximal and Simplified Maximal
transcriptions. Full Maximal is EVA with ligatures and rare characters included. Simplified Maxi-
9The exception is V101, which makes different assumptions about many character variants. In particular, V101
assumesthatmanysimilar-lookingglyphs,whichinothersystemsareconsideredtobevariantsofthesamecharacter,
are different characters. It is not easy to convert between V101 and other systems, and V101 has a larger character
inventory. We are utilizing EVA because it is the system used for the interlinear files and because we believe the
character inventory size is more plausible.
10In a previous version of this paper, the Maximal transcription was identical to EVA. Here we introduce a single
differenceinvolvingthetreatmentofplumestrokes. Theeffectoncharacterentropyisminimal: conditionalcharacter
entropy falls 0.0-3.2% depending on the sample text.
10

=== PAGE 11 ===
Figure 5: The Simplified Maximal transcription: ligatures are ignored, and rare characters (includ-
ing unusual plumes) are represented by an asterisk.
11

=== PAGE 12 ===
mal removes the ligatures and uses an asterisk to designate all rare characters (with the exception
of the x, which is the most frequent of the rare characters and appears in both diagrams and text).
The Simplified Maximal alphabet has about half as many characters (23 rather than 45), but this
has a minimal effect on character statistics because of the infrequency of rare characters. Figure 6
shows the three transcriptions on a portion of folio 49 recto.
12

=== PAGE 13 ===
Figure6: FullMaximal,SimplifiedMaximal,andMinimaltranscriptionsoffolio49recto,paragraph
2, lines 1-5
13

=== PAGE 14 ===
3.1.2 Voynich Document Preparation
The Voynich texts created for this analysis were derived from the Landini-Stolfi Interlinear Gloss
File (LSI), which contains multiple transcriptions of the Voynich manuscript in EVA. We used
Takeshi Takahashi’s transcription for our corpus because it is the most complete.11 Voynichese in
the LSI is written out line-by-line and accompanied by notes and metadata. We used R to parse
thiscodeintoalongtableinwhicheachwordofVoynicheseisassociatedwithitsprecisepositionin
the text. This consisted of deleting the notes, copying the page-level and line-level metadata, and
separating the words by word breaks.12 We then calculated the word’s position from the beginning
and end of the line and from the beginning and end of the paragraph. In our long table, each
Voynichese word is listed sequentially along with the following metadata:
1. Full Maximal (EVA) transcription of the word
2. Simplified Maximal transcription of the word
3. Distance from the Beginning of the Line (1, 2, 3, etc.)
4. Distance from the End of the Line
5. Distance from the Beginning of the Paragraph
6. Distance from the End of the Paragraph
7. Paragraph/Diagram designation
8. Line Number on the page
9. Folio Number
10. Quire Number
11. Section of the Manuscript
12. Language (Currier’s designation)
13. Hand (Davis’ designation)
14. Transcriber
The long table can then be consulted to create Voynich documents that focus on particular
Voynich Languages, Hands, types of text, or positions within the folio, paragraph, or line. We used
it to create the sixteen Voynich documents listed at the beginning of this section: Full Voynich,
Full Voynich Text, Voynich A, Voynich A Text, Voynich B, Voynich B Text, Voynich 1, Voynich 1
Text, Voynich 2, Voynich 2 Text, Voynich 3, Voynich 3 Text, Voynich 4, Voynich 4 Text, Voynich
5, and Voynich 5 Text.
11A full set of transliterations can be found at http://www.voynich.nu/transcr.html#links. There are a small
numberofgapsinTakahashi’stranscription,includinglabelsontheRosepages,partialtextonthefoldoutpagesfor
f101, and the small amount of (non-Voynich) text on f116v, the last page.
12Credible word breaks in the LSI are represented by periods, and possible word breaks by commas. We followed
the credible word breaks.
14

=== PAGE 15 ===
3.2 The Wikipedia Corpus
To date, the online encyclopedia Wikipedia has versions in approximately 319 different languages.
These versions are separate collaboratively edited editions which range widely in size. The English
edition boasts over six million articles, although only about half of the language editions contain
more than 1,000 entries.13 While it varies from language to language, a single wikipedia entry
contains on average about 500 words, which means that the Voynich manuscript contains roughly
the same amount of text as 75 wikipedia articles.14 Our Wikipedia corpus consists of a sample of
every language that has more than 100 articles.
The primary advantage of the Wikipedia Corpus is that we can compare Voynich text with that
of many different languages, language families, and scripts, and see whether Voynich falls within
the range of plausible languages or language families, and if so, which languages or families it most
closely resembles statistically. The conventions, motivations, and contents of modern online ency-
clopedias are obviously very different from that of a medieval herbal and astrological manuscript.
However, bothconsistofdiscretecollectionsofinformativetextonspecializedtopics. Thelanguage
of Voynichese should in many structural aspects be more akin to modern wikipedia entries than,
for example, medieval diary entries or historical narratives. In contrast to encyclopedia entries, we
would expect narratives to follow a temporal sequence throughout, for verbs to be predominantly
in the past tense, and for certain names and pronouns to recur predictably. The Wikipedia corpus
is thus particularly well-suited for comparison with the Voynich texts. It is also superior to more
formal genres of corpora like newspaper corpora, which are written for a different purpose and
contain far fewer languages.
The Wikipedia Corpus consists of 311 language samples written in thirty-four different scripts,
categorized into thirty-nine major language families and seventy-three subfamilies. In most cases,
thesamplesconsistofthefirst200,000wordsfromwikipediaentriesforthatlanguageedition,listed
alphabetically by headword. The corpus includes samples of many languages which are plausible
candidatesforVoynichese,e.g. RomancedialectslikeCorsicanandLombardandGermanicdialects
likeBavarianandLowSaxon. TherearealsosamplesofextinctlanguageslikeGothic,Anglo-Saxon,
andPali, aswellasninemodernartificially-constructedlanguagesincludingEsperantoandLojban.
Some language families are particularly well-represented in the Corpus, with ten or more lan-
guage samples for each family. These are the Bantu, Germanic, Indic, Iranian, Malayo-Polynesian,
Romance, Slavic, Tibeto-Burman, Turkic, and Uralic families.
3.2.1 Wikipedia Document Preparation
The documents used for this analysis were obtained February 2021 from wikimedia dump files.15
These files are continually updated and available at http://dumps.wikimedia.org. We down-
13See http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/List_of_Wikipedias for a current list of wikipedia versions by number
of entries.
14The entry word count for English wikipedia is much larger than most other languages because it tends to have
longer entries. The average word count per entry in our English sample is over 3,700.
15In a previous version of this paper, we described an earlier process for obtaining Wikipedia sample texts. In
2019, we processed wikidump files using the Python Gensim module and limited our samples to the first 500 articles
ineachlanguage. Ournewmethodologycreatesdramaticallycleanertexts,andthetextsizesaremoreevenbecause
we limit the text by number of words rather than number of articles. Between 2019 and 2021, Wikipedia added
thefollowinglanguages: Awadhi,Balinese,GuiananCreole,Kotava,Ladin,Madurese,Mon,MoroccanArabic,Nias,
N’Ko, Saraiki, Inari Sami, and Sakizaya. The Northern Luri wikipedia was deleted. These changes have been made
to the lists of languages and families given below.
15

=== PAGE 16 ===
loaded the BZIP2 compressed files titled Articles, templates, media/file descriptions, and primary
meta-pages. For most of the dump files, we ran a python script to process them into raw text
documents containing the first 200,000 words from wikipedia entries for that language, including
only articles that consist of 100 or more words.16
We deleted any remaining metadata and tables by hand. We then further processed the texts
by removing punctuation and capitalization, and deleted any characters with less than a .01%
occurrence in Latin, Cyrillic, Greek, Arabic, and Hebrew. In English, this filters everything but
the lowercase letters (a-z). We filtered the text by the unicode range of the particular script in
order to delete irrelevant characters.
Wikipedia versions differ widely by average article length. A small number of languages, in-
cluding Cree, Cheyenne, and Inupiak, contain mostly short single-line articles with a repetitive
structure. For these samples we included articles of all sizes and hand-deleted repetitive text, but
this means that the resulting sample texts are quite short. Some other wikipedia versions, most
notably Cebuano and Waray-Waray, have an inflated number of articles because a high percentage
of entries were created by bots. Bot-created entries also tend to be short and formulaic, although
this should be a minimal issue for our corpus because we deleted articles of less than 100 words.17
3.2.2 Wikipedia Languages by Family
This is a full list of the language samples in the Wikipedia Corpus categorized by language family
and sub-family. An ideal corpus would contain a large number of languages from each language
family, and the sub-family categories would represent languages at an approximately equal time
depth of divergence. However, the list of Wikipedia languages, while representing an impressive
diversity of language families, is nevertheless skewed heavily towards European languages.
Thecategorizationbelowisanattempttogrouptogetherlanguageswhicharegeneticallysimilar
while keeping the size of the categories approximately equal. Sub-families were chosen in language
families with a large representation in the Corpus. If there are single languages from distinct
sub-families, an “Other” category is used. For simplicity, extinct languages and proto-language
progenitors of a family (e.g. Latin, Sanskrit, and Gothic) are also grouped into the “Other”
category.
There are two categories in this list that are not based upon genetic relatedness. All artificially-
constructed languages are grouped under a single category. The Constructed languages that have
Wikipedia versions are all international auxiliary languages meant to facilitate communication (as
opposed to artistic constructed language like Klingon or Quenya). They are all heavily based on
the vocabulary and grammar of European languages.18 The second category is that of Creoles,
which are not the product of language divergence in a single family but rather have a complex
genetic relationship with two or more language families. Here they have been subcategorized by
their lexifier language, which is the language from which most of their vocabulary is drawn.
16Thepythonscript,alongwiththetextfilesandamorein-depthdescriptionoftheextractionprocess,isavailable
athttp://www.lukelindemann.com/wiki_corpus.html. Forlanguageswithscriptsthatdonotusespacesforwords,
e.g. Thai and Chinese scripts, we instead extracted the first 100 articles. Some versions utilize two different scripts
in different entries, e.g. Kashmiri has entries in either Devanagari or Arabic scripts, and we created two separate
texts in this case.
17Note that we have not filtered articles for whether they were created by bots, such as the Lsjbot (cf. https:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lsjbot.
18The exception is Lojban, which is a constructed logical language designed as an experiment in eliminating
syntactic ambiguity.
16

=== PAGE 17 ===
1. Afro-Asiatic:
(a) Semitic: Amharic, Arabic, Aramaic, Egyptian Arabic, Hebrew, Maltese, Moroccan
Arabic, Tigrinya
(b) Other families: Hausa, Kabyle, Oromo, Somali
2. Albanian: Albanian
3. Algonquian: Atikamekw, Cheyenne, Cree (Canadian Syllabics), Cree (Latin)
4. Armenian: Armenian, Western Armenian
5. Athabaskan: Navajo
6. Austroasiatic: Khmer, Mon, Santali, Vietnamese, Banjar
7. Aymara: Aymara
8. Baltic: Latgalian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Samogitian
9. Caucasian: Abkhazian,Adyghe,Avar,Chechen,Ingush,KabardianCircassian,Lak,Lezgian
10. Celtic: Breton, Welsh, Irish, Scottish Gaelic, Manx, Cornish
11. Constructed: Esperanto,Interlingua,Interlingue,Ido,Kotava,Lojban,LinguaFrancaNova,
Novial, Volapük
12. Creoles:
(a) English: Bislama, Jamaican Patois, Norfolk, Sranan, Tok Pisin
(b) French: Haitian
(c) Portuguese: Guianan Creole, Papiamentu
(d) Spanish: Zamboanga Chavacano
13. Dravidian: Kannada, Malayalam, Tamil, Tulu, Telugu
14. Germanic:
(a) Anglic: English, Scots, Simple English
(b) Dutch: Afrikaans, Dutch, West Flemish, Zeelandic
(c) Frisian: North Frisian, West Frisian, Saterland Frisian
(d) High German: Alemannic,Bavarian,German,Ripuarian,Luxembourgisch,Palatinate
German, Yiddish
(e) Low German: Low Saxon, Dutch Low Saxon
(f) North Germanic: Danish, Faroese, Icelandic, Norwegian (Nynorsk), Norwegian (Bok-
mål), Swedish
(g) Other families/proto-languages: Anglo-Saxon, Gothic, Limburgish
15. Hellenic: Greek, Pontic
16. Indic:
(a) Central: Awadhi, Hindi, Urdu, Fiji Hindi,
(b) Eastern: Assamese, Bengali, Maithili, Odia, Bihari, Bishnupriya Manipuri,
17

=== PAGE 18 ===
(c) Northern: Doteli, Nepali
(d) Northwestern: Sindhi, Punjabi, Saraiki, Western Punjabi
(e) Southern: Sinhalese, Divehi, Marathi, Goan Konkani
(f) Western: Romani, Gujarati
(g) Other families/proto-languages: Kashmiri (Arabic), Kashmiri (Devanagari), San-
skrit, Pali (Devanagari), Pali (Latin)
17. Inuit: Greenlandic, Inuktitut (Canadian Syllabics), Inuktitut (Latin), Inupiak
18. Iranian: Sorani, Zazaki, Persian, Gilaki, Kurdish, Mazandarani, Ossetian, Pashto, Tajik
19. Iroquoian: Cherokee
20. Japonic: Japanese
21. Kartvelian: Georgian, Mingrelian
22. Koreanic: Korean
23. Malayo-Polynesian:
(a) Javanesic: Banyumasan, Javanese
(b) Malayic: Indonesian, Malay, Minangkabau
(c) Polynesian: Tongan, Hawaiian, Maori, Samoan, Tahitian
(d) Phillipine: Central Bicolano, Cebuano, Gorontalo, Ilokano, Pangasinan, Kapampan-
gan, Tagalog, Waray-Waray
(e) Other families: Acehnese,Balinese,Buginese(Buginese),Buginese(Latin),Chamorro,
Fijian, Madurese, Malagasy, Nauruan, Nias, Sundanese, Tetum
24. Mande: Bambara, N’Ko
25. Moksha: Moksha
26. Mongolic: Buryat, Mongolian, Kalmyk
27. Niger-Congo:
(a) Bantu: Kongo, Lingala, Luganda, Northern Sotho, Chichewa, Kikuyu, Kinyarwanda,
Kirundi,Shona,Swati,Sesotho,Swahili,Tswana,Tsonga,Tumbuka,Twi,Venda,Xhosa,
Zulu
(b) Other families: Akan, Ewe, Fula, Igbo, Kabiye, Sango, Wolof, Yoruba
28. Nilotic: Dinka
29. Quechua: Quechua
30. Romance:
(a) Italo-Dalmatian: Italian, Corsican, Sicilian, Neapolitan, Venetian, Tarantino
(b) Gallo-Romance: Catalan,French,Franco-Provençal,Ladin,Occitan,Picard,Norman,
Walloon
(c) Gallo-Italic: Piedmontese, Ligurian, Lombard, Emilian-Romagnol
(d) Iberian: Aragonese,Asturian,Extremaduran,Galician,Ladino,Mirandese,Portuguese,
Spanish
18

=== PAGE 19 ===
(e) Other families/proto-languages: Aromanian, Friulian, Romanian, Romansh, Sar-
dinian, Latin
31. Slavic
(a) East Slavic: Belarusian, Belarusian Taraškievica, Russian, Ukrainian
(b) West Slavic: Czech, Kashubian, Lower Sorbian, Upper Sorbian, Polish, Rusyn, Slovak,
Silesian
(c) South Slavic: Bulgarian, Bosnian, Croatian, Macedonian, Serbo-Croatian, Serbian,
Slovenian, Old Church Slavonic
32. Tai: Lao, Shan, Thai, Zhuang
33. Tibeto-Burman: Tibetan, Min Dong, Dzongkha, Gan, Hakka, Burmese, Newar, Wu, Chi-
nese, Classical Chinese, Min Nan, Cantonese
34. Tupian: Guarani
35. Turkic:
(a) Oghuz: Azerbaijani, Chuvash, Gagauz, South Azerbaijani, Turkmen, Turkish
(b) Karluk: Uyghur, Uzbek
(c) Kipchak: Bashkir, Crimean Tatar, Karakalpak, Kazakh, Karachay-Balkar, Kirghiz,
Tatar (Cyrillic), Tatar (Latin)
(d) Siberian: Sakha, Tuvan
36. Uralic:
(a) Finnic: Estonian, Finnish, Vepsian, Võro
(b) Permic: Komi-Permyak, Komi, Udmurt
(c) Mari: Meadow Mari, Hill Mari
(d) Sami: Inari Sami, Northern Sami
(e) Other families: Erzya, Hungarian, Livvi-Karelian, Northern Sami
37. Uto-Aztecan: Nahuatl
38. Vasconic: Basque
3.3 The Historical Corpus
The Wikipedia Corpus contains a large number of languages and language families, but it consists
entirely of modern texts. It is therefore necessary to compare Voynichese to contemporaneous his-
torical manuscripts as well, because there are important differences between modern and historical
texts which are not typically addressed in statistical analyses of Voynichese.
One important point of difference is spelling standardization, which is much higher in most
modern languages than it is in medieval manuscripts. This is less of an issue for medieval Latin
texts, asLatinhasbeenstandardsincetheClassicalPeriod, butitisanimportantconsiderationfor
the many written languages which had yet to standardize by the 15th century. Spelling variation
will have an effect on statistics like type-token ratio because a single word will be represented by
multiple types.
19

=== PAGE 20 ===
A second important difference concerns the typographical conventions of scribes. Because all
literature was written and copied by hand during this period, scribes developed hundreds of abbre-
viations and symbols to represent frequently occurring phrases, words, and grammatical functions.
This was especially prevalent in Latin texts. It introduces variability of a different type, and has an
effect on statistics like the information entropy of the text. However, most modern transcriptions
of historical manuscripts omit these abbreviations and conventions for readability.
3.3.1 Description of the Corpus
The Historical Corpus consists of transcriptions of manuscripts written between 400 and 1600 AD.
The corpus is continuously updated as we discover new sources of digitally transcribed historical
manuscripts. ThelanguagesrepresentedinthecorpuscurrentlyincludeEnglish,Georgian,Hebrew,
Icelandic, Italian, Latin, Persian, and Spanish. The majority of the texts are in Latin and English.
In order to match the presumed contents of the Voynich manuscript, we have made an effort
to include texts on magic, astrology, and alchemy. Many of the important texts in this genre,
including the highly influential Secretum Secretorum, were originally written in Arabic or Persian
and were being translated into Latin and vernacular European languages during the time that
the Voynich manuscript was created. We have included a Latin and English translation of the
Secretum Secretorum, an English translation of the Alphabet of Tales, Agrippa’s Three Books of
Occult Philosophy, a Spanish translation of Picatrix, and Bruno’s Latin De Magia. We have also
included Trithemius’ Steganographia, which is ostensibly about magic and spirit communication
but is in fact an enciphered treatise on cryptography. In the historically related topic of Medicine,
we have included the Science of Cirurgie and the archives of Richard Napier’s medical records
collected by the Casebooks Project at the University of Cambridge.
A secondary goal in the creation of the Historical Corpus is to collect manuscripts in parallel
diplomatic and normalized versions. The diplomatic version of a manuscript uses special char-
acters to faithfully replicate the original abbreviations and typographical conventions, while the
normalized version does not use abbreviations and the orthography is typically modernized.19 This
allows us to directly compare the effect of typographical conventions on the same text, which may
provide insights into the peculiar properties of Voynichese. We have included parallel diplomatic
and normalized versions of three texts: the Icelandic Codex Wormianus, the English Medical Case-
books, and the Latin Necrologium Lundense. For the other Latin texts we also created our own
abbreviated forms of the texts based on widespread orthographic conventions; this material will be
discussed in forthcoming work.
A similar issue is found with abjad scripts like Arabic and Hebrew, which are typically written
without vowels. The exclusion of vowels has an effect on the entropy statistics of a text. We have
included two versions from the Tanakh: one with and one without the niqqud diacritics which are
used primarily to mark vowels.
Table 1 lists the historical manuscripts in the corpus, along with their language, script, approx-
imate date of composition, and author (or translator or scribe).
19A diplomatic transcription is technically distinct from a type facsimile, which uses digital fonts to replicate the
exact appearance of the text. For our purposes, we consider the most faithful available reproduction of a text to be
the diplomatic transcription.
20

=== PAGE 21 ===
Name Language Script Author Date
Medical Casebooks English Latin Richard Napier 1597
Three Books of English Latin Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa 1509
Occult Philosophy
Science of Cirurgie English Latin Lanfranc of Milan 1306
Secretum Secretorum English Latin Robert Copland 1528
(translator)
Alphabet of Tales English Latin Etienne de Besançon 1400
Amiran-Darejaniani Georgian Georgian Mose Xoneli 1150
Mishneh Torah Hebrew Hebrew Maimonides 1170
Masoretic Tanakh Hebrew Hebrew Aaron ben Moses 1008
ben Asher (scribe)
Codex Wormianus Icelandic Latin Unknown 1350
La Rettorica Italian Latin Brunetto Latini 1261
Necrologium Lundense Latin Latin Unknown 1123
De Ortu Et Tempo Antichristi Latin Latin Adso Deruensis 900
Historia Hierosylmitanae Latin Latin Albert of Aix 1125
Expeditionis
De Magia Latin Latin Giordano Bruno 1590
Secretum Secretorum Latin Latin Philip of Tripoli 1270
(translator)
Steganographia Latin Latin Johannes Trithemius 1499
Sindbad-Name Persian Arabic Zahiri Samarqandi 1362
Picatrix Spanish Latin pseudo-Majriti 1256
Table 1: Details of historical manuscripts
3.3.2 Historical Document Preparation
Thetranscribedtextswereobtainedfrommultiplesources. TheGeorgian,Italian,andPersiantexts
come from the TITUS Project at the University of Frankfurt.20 The Icelandic text comes from the
Medieval Nordic Text Archive.21 The Hebrew Masoretic Tanakh comes from Sacred Texts22 and
the Christian Classics Ethereal Library23, while the Mishneh of Maimonidies was obtained here.24
OftheLatintexts,theSecretumSecretorum comesfromtheCorpusCorporumoftheUniversity
of Zurich25, the Necrologium Lundense comes from the Necrologium Lundense Online26, De Ortu
et Tempo Antichristi and Historia Hierosylmitanae Expeditionis come from the Latin Library27,
and De Magia and Steganographia come from the Twilit Grotto.28
20http://titus.uni-frankfurt.de
21http://clarino.uib.no/menota/page
22http://www.sacred-texts.com/bib/tan/index.htm
23http://www.ccel.org/a/anonymous/hebrewot/home.html
24http://kodesh.snunit.k12.il/i/0.htm
25http://mlat.uzh.ch/MLS/
26http://notendur.hi.is/mjm7/
27http://www.thelatinlibrary.com
28http://esotericarchives.com
21

=== PAGE 22 ===
The English Alphabet of Tales and Science of Cirurgie come the Corpus of Middle English
Prose and Verse at the University of Michigan.29 The Medical Casebooks come from the Casebooks
Project of the University of Cambridge.30 The English translation of the Secretum Secretorum
comes from Colour Country,31 and Agrippa’s Three Books of Occult Philosophy are from the Twilit
Grotto.32
SomeofthesetextsaremuchlongerthantheVoynichmanuscript, andsowehaveincludedonly
a portion of the entire text. We restricted the Masoretic Tanakh to the Bereshit, i.e. the Book of
Genesis. WeincludedtheintroductionandfirsttwobooksoftheMishneh,thefirstsixtypagesofthe
Codex Wormianus, and the first three books of the Science of Cirurgie. The Necrologium Lundense
currentlyhasnormalizedanddiplomatictranscriptionsofthreefolios(f124v,f125r,f125v),butthey
are substantive enough that we included them here. For the Medical Casebooks, we copied the first
fifty chronologically sorted consultations taken by Richard Napier and written in his hand.
AswiththeWikipediaCorpus,thehistoricaldocumentswerecleanedbyremovingcapitalization
and punctuation, as well as notes made by transcribers. For texts in Latin scripts, symbols with a
lessthan.01%occurrencewereremoved. Textswritteninnon-Latinscriptswerefilteredbyunicode
range. For the diplomatic texts, special characters – including character variants and astrological
symbols – were left intact.
4 Conditional Character Entropy in Voynichese
In this section, we demonstrate the usage of the Historical and Wikipedia corpora by examining
the character-level properties of Voynichese. As discussed in Bowern and Lindemann (2020), we
are particularly interested in the metric of conditional character entropy, or second-order character
entropy (h2). Conditional character entropy is a measure of the overall predictability of characters
in a text. In his 1976 book on computational applications to scientific and engineering problems,
Yale physicist William Bennett Jr. used a transcription of Voynichese to illustrate the concept
of information entropy in language and its application to cryptography. He found the conditional
character entropy of Voynichese to be surprisingly low compared to a sample of European plain
texts and ciphers. This means that Voynichese characters are unusually predictable compared
to most European languages. We discuss the definition of conditional character entropy and the
history of its application to the Voynich manuscript more thoroughly in Bowern and Lindemann
(2020).
This conditional character entropy value of a text, h2, is dependent upon the conventions of
the script in which it is written. For example, Bennett (1976) found that the h2 of Voynichese was
roughlyequivalenttothatofaHawaiiantext. Stallings(1998)pointedoutthatBennett’sHawaiian
sample used a simplified orthography that did not contain glottal stops or distinguish between long
and short vowels, and this has the effect of making the Hawaiian text look more predictable (and
more like Voynichese). The following factors potentially have an effect on the h2 value of a text:
1. Document Length
2. Character set size (total number of characters in the alphabet)
29http://quod.lib.umich.edu
30http://casebooks.lib.cam.ac.uk
31http://www.colourcountry.net/secretum/
32http://esotericarchives.com
22

=== PAGE 23 ===
3. Type of script (alphabet, syllabary, abugida, abjad, etc.)
4. Abbreviations and other typographical conventions
5. Encoding process (if the text is a cipher)
Wediscussthefirstfourofthesefactorsindetailbelow(thefifthwillbediscussedinaforthcom-
ing paper). We find that Voynich A and B are of a suﬀicient length that the h2 values are reliable,
and that the exclusion of rare characters (Maximal Simplified as opposed to the Full Maximal
transcription) has a negligible effect on entropy.
The type of script (Maximal as opposed to Minimal) has a more appreciable effect on entropy,
but all transcriptions of Voynich are significantly lower than any other text in the corpora. An
analysis of script types in the Wikipedia and Historical corpora shows that Voynich most closely
resembles an alphabetic script rather than an abjad, abugida, or syllabary.
We compare the parallel diplomatic and normalized versions of historical texts, as well as the
forms of Hebrew with and without vowels, and conclude that the unusual character entropy of
Voynich is not attributable to conventional scholarly abbreviations or the absence of characters
that represent vowels.
At the character level, Voynichese most closely resembles tonal languages written in the Latin
script and other languages in which there is a restricted set of word-final characters. This is
likely the result of an encoding process, and may suggest that Voynichese simplifies the phonemic
distinctions of the language it represents.
4.1 Character Frequency Distribution
In its simplest characteristics, Voynichese does not appear very different from other texts in the
Historical and Wikipedia corpora. The character set size for both the Maximal transcription (42
characters)andMinimaltranscription(45characters)iswellwithinthegeneralrangeforalphabets:
25-92 characters.33 As discussed in Section 4.4, the Voynichese character set size is small compared
to non-alphabetic script types like abugidas and syllabaries, but it is the right size for an alphabet.
Secondly, the character frequency distribution of Voynichese is fairly typical. This is demon-
strated in Figure 7, which displays the ranked proportional frequencies of the thirty most frequent
characters in Voynichese compared with those of texts in the Historical and Wikipedia corpora.
Character frequency distribution is related to and reflected in the metric of unigram character
entropy (H1), which measures character-level predictability irrespective of position within the text.
Here again, Voynichese is not unusual: H1 is 3.94 for Minimal Voynich and 3.91 for Maximal
Voynich, while the overall range for alphabets in the corpora is from 3.57-4.82 bits.
The Voynich text only begins to look unusual when we factor in the position of a character
within the text. Conditional character entropy (h2) measures the predictability of a character
given the character that precedes it. This is the metric that Bennett (1976) found to produce
unusually low values in Voynichese, and on which we focus this analysis.
4.2 Entropy Variance and Document Length
Two texts written in the same language and script may have slightly different h2 values due to
differences in content and stylistic variation. With a large enough text sample, this variation is
33The Simplified Maximal transcription has only 23 characters, but it excludes rare characters and therefore rep-
resents an absolute lowest estimate.
23

=== PAGE 24 ===
Figure 7: Proportional Frequency of the thirty most frequent characters in the Historical Corpus
texts, the (alphabetic) Wikipedia Corpus texts, and Voynichese (Full Maximal and Minimal tran-
scriptions). Simplified Maximal is identical to Full Maximal with regards to frequent characters.
The first ranked character for each language is a space, and its frequency indicates average word
length.
minimal. If a text sample is very short, there will not be enough data to obtain a reliable h2 result,
and there will be more variation.
The Voynich manuscript contains roughly 38 thousand words, of which 11 thousand are in
Voynich A and 23 thousand are in Voynich B. We need to know whether these lengths are suﬀicient
for obtaining reasonably certain h2 values, and what sort of variance can be expected.
We tested h2 variance using the English wikipedia sample, which consists of 199,564 words. We
calculated the h2 values samples of randomly selected sequences of text at various word lengths.
The results are in Figure 8.
With a window of only 50 words, the average h2 is 2.62, there is a wide range of 2.0-2.9, and
the standard deviation is 0.12. The average is much lower than the text’s overall h2 value of
3.40. As the window size increases, the variance tightens and the averages converge on the overall
value. With a window of 10,000 words, the average is 3.35, the range is 3.22-3.42, and the standard
deviation is 0.033. This means that 95% of the samples are within 0.066 bits of the average, and
the average is within 0.05 bits of the text’s overall h2 value. For documents of around 10,000 words
we should therefore reasonably expect h2 to be accurate to about one-tenth of a bit.
When running the same procedure on Voynich A and Voynich B, the h2 variance is comparable
to that of English. The standard deviation at 50 words is 0.13 for A and 0.15 for B (compared
to 0.13 in English), and at 5,000 words it is 0.049 for A and 0.072 for B (compared to 0.048 in
English).
This means that the Voynich A and Voynich B sample are large enough to obtain reasonable
entropy calculations. However, an analysis at the level of sections, scribal hands, or folios will be
24

=== PAGE 25 ===
Figure 8: Density plot of h2 values for random samples of English at multiple word lengths from
50-100,000. Each window size is sampled 1,000 times. The red dot is the average and the line
indicates one standard deviation from the mean.
somewhat less reliable.
4.3 Entropy in Voynichese
For Voynichese, Language A and Language B pattern differently. Conditional character entropy in
Language B is lower regardless of the transcription system, while in Language A it is only slightly
higher than in the combined Full text (see Figure 9). The compositionality of the transcription
system has an effect on h2. Maximal Voynich has a lower h2 than Minimal Voynich, because glyph
compositions are based upon common glyph sequences (making the text appear more predictable).
The h2 values for running paragraph text (excluding labels on diagrams) is slightly lower than
text with labels included. Voynichese in labels and diagrams has a higher h2. Scribe Hand 1, which
is used to write Language A, has a nearly identical h2. Scribe Hands 2 and 3, which are used to
write Language B, have values quite similar to B. Scribe Hands 4 and 5 have values slightly higher
than Language B, as they are mostly employed in writing labels and diagrams. These values are
listed in Appendix A.
In all cases, the character set size for Voynichese is between 21 and 45 characters, and the
conditional character entropy ranges from 1.91 to 2.56 bits.
4.3.1 Character Set Size
The Full Maximal and Maximal Simplified transcriptions have nearly identical h2 values despite a
significant difference in the size of the character sets. With the Full Voynich text, the Simplified
Maximal transcription has twenty-two fewer characters, but there is only a .08% difference in
conditional character entropy (2.114 to 2.112).
25

=== PAGE 26 ===
Figure 9: Character set size is plotted against conditional character entropy (h2). Lower h2 values
indicate more predictability in character bigrams.
This is significant, because conditional character entropy can be affected by character set size
(as noted in Stallings 1998). It is potentially important because the upper bound for conditional
character entropy is determined by the value of H0, calculated as the logarithm of character set
size. For example, a text that uses an alphabet of 16 characters will have a maximum conditional
character entropy of 4 bits, while an alphabet of 49 characters will have a maximum h2 of 7 bits.
However, if the additional characters are rare, the overall effect on h2 is slight. The process
of cleaning a text by removing highly infrequent characters does not have an appreciable effect
on entropy. After removing the capitalization, numerals, and punctuation from the raw English
sample, thereare75remainingcharacters. TheseincludescharacterswhichareveryrareinEnglish
or exist only in foreign words, such as ü and ç. Processing the sample involves removing characters
which appear with a frequency less than 0.01%, after which only 27 characters remain. However,
the difference in h2 between the filtered and unfiltered English sample is only 0.08% (3.406 to
3.403).
Ontheotherhand, thereisanappreciabledifferenceinentropybetweentheMinimalandMaxi-
maltranscriptions, despitethefactthatthecharactersetsizeisroughlysimilar. Thisdemonstrates
that decisions about the composition of high-frequency glyph sequences have a greater effect on
entropy than decisions about the inclusion of low-frequency characters.
26

=== PAGE 27 ===
4.3.2 Languages A and B
Voynich Language A and Language B are similar at the character level. Despite the fact that they
have different distributions at the word level, the most frequent character sequences are roughly
the same in both languages. There are two exceptions, which illustrate the difference in entropy
between the two texts.
The -edy glyph sequence found at the end of words is eighty-six times more common in Voynich
B (one out of five words in Voynich B end with this sequence). Secondly, the qo- sequence at the
beginning of a word is about twice as common in Voynich B (also found in one in five words).
The frequency of these two sequences alone substantially increase the predictability of the Voynich
B text, and this is the main source of the differences in conditional character entropy between A
and B. If the two sequences are removed from both texts, then the h2 value for Language A and
Language B come within about 1% of each other.34
4.4 Comparison to the Wikipedia Corpus
Of the 311 wikipedia language samples represented in the Wikipedia Corpus, none of them have
an h2 comparable to Voynichese. Voynichese has lower values, meaning that its text is more
predictable. While the Minimal Voynich transcription is slightly higher (with an average h2 of 2.48
rather than 2.11), this is still lower than the h2 range in the Wikipedia Corpus, from 2.77-6.14.
Figure 10 depicts the character set size and conditional character entropy for texts that use
between 20 and 55 characters and have an h2 range from 2.5 to 4. This is the range of most of the
alphabets in the Corpus. The majority of Wikipedia versions (202 languages) are written in the
Latin script, although the Corpus also includes samples of Cyrillic, Georgian, Gothic, Greek, Ol
Chiki and N’Ko. Languages written in Cyrillic, which are mostly Slavic and Turkic, tend to have
a somewhat higher h2.
Most of the abjads are also in this range. Abjads are writing systems in which consonants
are written and vowels are (mostly) not represented. The abjads in the Corpus include Arabic
and Hebrew. They are used to write Afro-Asiatic (specifically Semitic), Indic, Iranian, and Turkic
languages, as well as the Germanic language Yiddish. They also have a somewhat higher h2 on
average.
The conditional character entropy of texts written in Latin scripts ranges from 2.8-3.8, and
includes all of the languages with the lowest h2 values. The languages with h2 values closest
to Voynichese are Hawaiian, Venda, Tswana, and Min Dong. Hakka and Min Dong are Tibeto-
Burman languages, while Venda and Tswana are Bantu (Niger-Congo). It is noteworthy that all
except Hawaiian are tonal languages that use a Latin script for their orthography. That is, they
systematically collapse suprasegmental distinctions.
Expanding outward, Figure 11 includes languages that contain up to 130 characters and have
a conditional entropy between 2.5 and 4.5. These primarily consist of the abugidas. Abugidas are
writing systems in which consonant-vowel sequences are written as a unit, with consonants as the
primary symbol and vowels added to it. The abugidas in the corpus include Bengali, Buginese,
Devanagari, Gujarati, Gurmukhi, Kannada, Khmer, Lao, Malayalam, Myanmar, Odia, Sinhala,
Tamil, Telugu, Thaana, Thai, and Tibetan. They are all derived from the Brahmi script, and are
34Thefrequency ofthis commonglyph sequence ispartially attributableto asingle wordchedy, whichis themost
common word in B and almost entirely absent from A. But even when this word is disregarded, -edy is significantly
more common in B.
27

=== PAGE 28 ===
Figure 10: Conditional Character Entropy and Character Size for Wikipedia Languages from 20-55
characters. Full Maximal Voynich (A, B, and Full) is shown at the bottom. The languages with
the closest h2 values are Hawaiian (2.77), Venda (2.79), Tswana (2.82), Min Dong (2.84), Tahitian
(2.85), Hakka (2.86), and Sango (2.86).
used to write Austroasiatic, Dravidian, Indic, Tai, and Tibeto-Burman languages. The abugidas
usually have many more characters but tend to have only a slightly higher entropy.
Expanding even further, Figure 12 includes languages that contain up to 7000 characters and
haveaconditionalentropyupto6.5. Thelanguagesthatarewrittenwithlogogramshavethehigh-
est character set sizes and highest entropy values. For these languages, each character represents a
morpheme or word, and thus character entropy is approximately equal to word entropy. Chinese
logograms are used to write varieties of Chinese and other Tibeto-Burman languages: Cantonese,
Chinese, Classical Chinese, Gan, and Wu. Also included under this category is Japanese, which
uses a mixed writing system with logograms and two syllabaries, and ranges between syllabaries
and logograms in character set size and h2.
Between this extreme and the abugidas are syllabaries, in which a single character denotes a
syllable. ThesyllabariesincludescriptsdesignedfortheIroquoianlanguageCherokeeandtheInuit
language Inuktitut. They also include the Hangul script used for Korean and the Ethiopic (Ge’ez)
script used to write Amharic and Tigrinya. Technically, Ethiopic is an abugida and Hangul is an
alphabet, but both are represented in unicode by separate codes for each full syllable rather than
with combining characters. Thus they have the character set size and conditional entropy in the
syllabary range. The full table of values for each language may be found in Appendix B.
The Voynichese script patterns most closely with the alphabets in the Wikipedia Corpus. The
28

=== PAGE 29 ===
Figure 11: Conditional Character Entropy and Character Size for Wikipedia Languages from 20-
130 characters. Most of the Abugidas are in this range, of which the Tibeto-Burman and Indic
languages tend to have lower h2 values and the Austroasiatic and Tai languages have higher h2
values. The grey box indicates the range of the previous graph.
charactersetsizeofFullMaximalandMinimalVoynichesearequitesimilartomostofthealphabets
in the sample, but the h2 values are lower than we see with any of the languages in the Wikipedia
Corpus. The abjads are also similar, with an equivalent character set size but a slightly higher h2.
Voynichese clearly falls outside of the range of most abugidas, syllabaries, and logograms.
4.5 Comparison to the Historical Corpus
Figure 13 shows the range for the texts in the Historical Corpus. The texts written with alphabets
(Latin and Georgian) have an h2 range between 3 and 3.5, while the abjads (Hebrew and Arabic
scripts) range from 3.5 to 4. The five English and five Latin texts demonstrate the variability in h2
andcharactersetsizewithinthesamelanguage. Someofthesedifferencesareattributabletoscript
variation. The English Medical Casebooks, like the Icelandic Codex Wormianus and Necrologium
Lundense, has a larger alphabet because it contains somewhat more characters in the normalized
versions as well as the diplomatic versions.
4.5.1 Parallel Diplomatic and Normalized texts
Figure 14 shows how conditional entropy varies between parallel versions of the same text when
different forms of transliteration are employed. For the English Casebooks, Latin Necrologium
29

=== PAGE 30 ===
Figure 12: Conditional Character Entropy and Character Size for Wikipedia Languages from 20-
7000 characters. The grey box indicates the range of the previous graph.
Lundense, andIcelandicCodex Wormianus, thisconsistsofthenormalizedanddiplomaticversions.
For the Hebrew Bereshit, this consists of the text with or without niqqud vowel-marking diacritics.
We also compare the Full Maximal and Minimal transcriptions of the Voynich texts.
The graph illustrates the variation in the conditional entropy among the versions of historical
texts, which relates primarily to character set size rather than to the conditional entropy values.
The biggest difference in h2 is from the Hebrew Bereshit text, where including niqqud lowers the
values of h2 by 0.25 bits. Note that the variation between Voynich hands and characters is of a
similarorder, butalltheVoynichmeasurementsaresubstantiallylowerthanthehistoricalsamples.
The usage of abbreviations and special characters has the effect of raising the conditional
characterentropyoftheEnglish,Icelandic,andLatintextsandtakingthemfurtherfromthevalues
we find for Voynichese. The Minimal transcription of Voynich has a slightly higher conditional
character entropy, but it is clear that the extremely low conditional entropy of Voynichese is not
simply attributable to a particular Voynich transcription system or the kinds of abbreviations and
typographical conventions that were common in European manuscripts.
Reddy and Knight (2011) argue from the statistical distribution of letters and words that
Voynichese most closely resembles an abjad. Many Voynichese characters are only found at the
beginning or end of a word, which resembles the positional variants of letters in the Arabic script.
Comparison with the Wikipedia and Historical corpora demonstrates that the abjad hypothesis
is not, however, an explanation for the low conditional entropy in Voynichese. The abjads in our
corpora have a higher conditional character entropy than the alphabets, and adding the vowels
30

=== PAGE 31 ===
Figure 13: Conditional Character Entropy and Character Size for Historical Texts. The Voynich
transcriptionisFullMaximal, andthehistoricalscriptsarenormalizedandunabbreviated. Hebrew
is calculated without vowel markings. The alphabets range from 3-3.5 and the abjads range from
3.5-4.
back in with niqqud (essentially turning an abjad into an alphabet) lessens conditional character
entropy substantially. If Voynichese is an abjad, it is a highly unusual one.35
4.6 What makes Voynichese unique?
4.6.1 Entropy and Bigram Frequency
Conditional character entropy tells us about the predictability of a text at the character level. One
way of thinking about it is this: if you look at any character in a text, how certain can you be, on
average, that you will be able to guess the character that follows it? In the English sample from
the Wikipedia corpus, for example, the letter q is followed by the letter u 96% of the time.36 In
other words, the conditional frequency of the bigram qu is 96%. So if we see a q in an English text,
we can be reasonably certain that we know what the next letter is.
35Reddy and Knight (2011) also argue that the Voynich Manuscript might be written in an abjad because of the
results from their two-state HMM investigations. The HMM deduces a word formula of A*B rather than picking
out a class of consonants and one of vowels; this pattern was also found with their Arabic tests. However, this does
not necessarily mean that there are no vowels represented in the text, rather that the regularity and singularity of
word-final items is swamping other possible groupings.
36Some of the exceptions include the words FAQs, Iraqi, and qi.
31

=== PAGE 32 ===
Figure14: DifferencesbetweenParallelComparisonTexts: abbreviatedLatinhashigherconditional
character entropy than unabbreviated Latin, and the diplomatic transcriptions of Icelandic and
medical English have higher conditional character entropy than the normalized transcriptions. The
MinimaltranscriptionofVoynichesehashigherconditionalcharacterentropythantheFullMaximal
transcription.
However, all the other letters in English are much less predictable. For example, the most
common letter to follow p is e, but this only happens 17% of the time. Conditional character
entropy is the average for all letters weighted by their frequency, and this gives us a measure of
the overall level of disorder in the text. A text consisting of randomly generated characters has
a higher conditional character entropy than a text that contains meaningful and ordered natural
language. Voynichese, however, has starkly lower values than we see with any natural language,
meaning many of its letters are like the English q rather than p.
Figures (15) and (16) consist of two heatmaps of the English bigram space. The top map is
simply the conditional frequency of each bigram. Bright spots indicate bigrams with particularly
high conditional frequencies: qu, y# (the # symbol indicates a space, i.e., y at the end of a word),
ve and d#. In the bottom map, each of these values have been weighted by the overall frequency
of the bigram itself. This weighting gives a much better picture of which bigrams contribute to the
conditional character entropy of the text as a whole.
So while qu is a highly predictable pairing, the letter q itself is fairly rare, and therefore it has
a negligible effect on the predictability of the text as a whole. Note from the right side of this map
that certain letters at the end of the word (d#, s#, y#) make a contribution as a result of the
frequent English morphological suﬀixes (-ed, -s, and -y). Other bigrams like th, he, #a, and in in
32

=== PAGE 33 ===
Figure 15: Conditional Frequency of English Bigrams
Figure 16: Conditional Frequency of English Bigrams Weighted by Overall Bigram Frequency.
the most frequently used words in English (the, a, in). The bigram th is a digraph, meaning that
two characters are used to represent a single phoneme. Common digraphs can contribute to low
conditional character entropy values because the two letters together share the information load of
a single phoneme.
33

=== PAGE 34 ===
4.6.2 Compositionality, Word-finals, and Syllable Structure
ThisisrelatedtotheissueofcompositionalityinthetranscriptionofunknowntextslikeVoynichese.
If certain glyphs occur primarily in a particular sequence, this may be evidence that the sequence
of glyphs represents a single character. Thus Full Maximal Voynich (EVA), which is maximally
decomposed, has a lower conditional entropy than Minimal Voynich, for which common glyph
sequences are taken to be single characters. But even Minimal Voynich is much more predictable
than any of the European languages.
Compare the weighted heatmap for English at the bottom of Figure 15 with the weighted
heatmapforVenda(aSouthernBantulanguageofSouthAfrica)inFigure17. TheVendalanguage
has the second-lowest conditional character entropy of any non-Voynichese text in the corpora, and
thisadded predictabilityis visible inthe overallreddening of theheatmap. Thereare more bigrams
in Venda which are both highly predictable and extremely frequent in the text. The vh bigram is
a digraph found in some of the most common words in the language. Most notably, the letter a is
very common at the end of a word, as are the other vowels. In fact, 97% of all words in Venda end
with a vowel, and nearly half (48%) of all words end with an a.
Thisdramaticrestrictionofpossiblelettersattheendofthewordiscommonforlanguageswith
low conditional character entropy. For example, 98% of words in the Hawaiian sample end with a
vowel, and in Min Dong 95% of words end with either a vowel, k, or g. This is due to restrictions
on the possible syllable structures in these languages. While many Indo-European languages have
fairly complex syllables with consonant clusters that can occur both at the beginning or end of
the syllable, many languages of the Tibeto-Burman, Malayo-Polynesian, and Niger-Congo families
do not allow syllables to end with a consonant, and they disallow many of the consonant clusters
found in Indo-European languages. More complex syllables increase conditional character entropy
becauseeachconsonantcanbefollowedbyamuchlargernumberofpossibleconsonantsandvowels.
EvenamongEuropeanlanguages, thosethathavemorecomplexsyllables, suchasSlaviclanguages,
tend to have slightly higher conditional character entropy. Abjads have even higher conditional
character entropy because they lack written vowels altogether.
Secondly, Venda, likemost oftheotherlowestconditional-entropylanguages, istonal. Wordsin
tonal languages that differ only by tone may have distinct meanings, and so most orthographies of
these languages have a means of indicating tone. In tonal languages written with the Latin script
(like Vietnamese), diacritics over the vowels are often employed to indicate tone. The orthography
employed for the Venda sample, however, does not distinguish tone at all. This has the effect of
collapsing distinctions that are present in the spoken language: two words which are pronounced
differently may be spelled the same, and this makes the text more predictable.
Voynichese has a lower conditional entropy than these other languages because it has even more
frequent,highlypredictablebigrams. Figure18mapstheweightedconditionalbigramsfor(Simple)
Maximal Voynich. As with Venda, certain characters are usually found at the end of words: 41%
of words end with y, and 93% of words end with either y, n, l, r, m or s. Many other bigrams are
prominent in other parts of the word: the ch bench characters are usually found together at the
beginning of the word (but sometimes have an intervening gallows character), qo is found at the
beginning of words, dy is a very common sequence at the end of words, o is almost always followed
by l or a gallows symbol (usually t or k), and i is usually part of a word final sequence of in or iin.
All characters are heavily restricted in whether they can appear at the beginning, middle, or end
of the word, and which characters can come before or after.
The unusual predictability of Voynichese cannot be entirely attributed to the compositionality
34

=== PAGE 35 ===
Figure 17: Conditional Frequency of Venda Bigrams Weighted by Overall Bigram Frequency
Figure 18: Conditional Frequency of (Simple Maximal) Voynich Bigrams Weighted by Overall
Bigram Frequency
of the transcription system. The Minimal transcription of Voynichese lacks many of these highly
predictable bigrams, because common sequences like ch, iin, and qo are represented as single char-
acters (cf. Figure 4). But most characters are still restricted to certain positions in the word: S,
Z, Q, W, X and Y at the beginning, a, E, e, i, t, k, p and f in the middle, and N, M, 3, K, L,
35

=== PAGE 36 ===
Figure19: PrevalenceofBigramswithHighConditionalProbability(>50%)forVariousLanguages.
Red indicates the percentage of word-final bigrams (e.g. y#)
5, T, U, 0, G H and 1 at the end. Thus one cannot simply assume that the low character entropy
is due to our over-splitting of characters; even when they are grouped together, Voynichese is still
unusual compared to other language samples.
4.6.3 Bigrams with High Conditional Probability
Another way to investigate the relationship between script properties and entropy is to measure
the percentage of a text that contains bigrams with high conditional probability. Most texts have
relatively few bigrams with a conditional probability greater than 50%. In the English Wikipedia
text, there are only four: qu has 96% conditional probability, y# has 75%, ve has 59% conditional
probability, and d# has 54% conditional probability. Because most of these bigrams are relatively
infrequent, they make up only 3.3% of the text as a whole. By contrast, Voynich in the Simple
Maximum transcription contains 12 bigrams with high conditional probability, and they are much
more frequent, making up 29.3% of the text. With the Minimal transcription, there are 23 bigrams
with high conditional probability, and they make up 23.9% of the text.
Figure 19 shows for various languages the proportion of the text which consists of bigrams
with high conditional probability. The only other texts that have a comparable amount of high
conditional bigrams are those of Min Dong, Hakka, Venda, and Hawaiian, the four languages in
the Wikipedia corpus with the lowest conditional character entropy. Min Dong is between the two
Voynich transcriptions.
The red coloring denotes word-finals, i.e., characters which are followed by a space. In most
languages of the sample, the majority of predictable bigrams are at the ends of words, whether or
not their script contains characters which are found exclusively at the end of words (as with the
positional character variants of Arabic, Hebrew, and Greek). This is true for English, because y#
36

=== PAGE 37 ===
and d# are much more common than qu and ve. Voynichese, like Hakka and Min Dong, has a
great deal of word-final bigrams in addition to other types of bigrams.
4.7 Summary
At the character level, Voynichese is strikingly different from any other text in the Wikipedia and
Historical corpora. The character set size and frequency of characters is conventional, but the
characters are combined in an extremely predictable way, as indicated by an unusual conditional
character entropy that is distinctly lower than any of the 316 comparison texts.
This discrepancy is not attributable to the transcription system used to encode Voynich, al-
though decisions about the compositionality of glyph sequences can have a significant effect on
entropy. Nor is it the result of conventional scholarly abbreviations of the historical period or the
absence of written vowels.
Rather, it is largely the result of common characters which are heavily restricted to certain
positions within the word. Voynichese most closely resembles tonal languages written in the Latin
script and languages with relatively limited syllabic inventories.
We do not take this as evidence that the language underlying Voynich is likely to be from the
Niger-Congo, Malayo-Polynesian, or Tibeto-Burman families. A more reasonable scenario is that
the script ignores certain sound distinctions that are made in the underlying language, as Bennett’s
sample of Hawaiian did not include vowel distinctions and the Venda wikipedia text does not mark
tone. Whatever method was used to generate the Voynichese script, it created written words that
are highly constrained in form.
We have described the creation of a corpus of Voynich texts and two comparison corpora for
analyzing Voynichese from a broad typological perspective. In addition to the character-level
analysis given here, we have used these corpora for our overview in Bowern and Lindemann (2020)
and will continue to use them in subsequent analyses.
Onelineofinquirythatwillbeaddressedinforthcomingworkistheeffectofhistoricalencipher-
ment methods on character properties. Here we will make a few brief observations. If Voynichese
is encoded text, it must be more complex than a simple substitution cipher. A simple monoalpha-
betic substitution cipher will have absolutely no effect on conditional character entropy, because
the same characters simply shift places with one another. The addition of null (meaningless) char-
acters and multiple variants of high-frequency characters were used to make it harder to identify
uniquely frequent characters. This can have an effect on character entropy (as can more complex
polyalphabetic ciphers), but we would then expect the character frequency distribution of Voyn-
ichese to be atypical. They also affect the distribution of minimal pairs (if null-insertion operates
on an otherwise monoalphabetic cipher). We can also rule out most types of polyalphabetic cipher,
since such ciphers would disrupt the regular encoding of identical words across pages, as well as
increasing (rather than decreasing) h2.
Voynichese is a clear outlier at the character level, and we might be tempted to conclude
from this that the text is meaningless. However, the Voynich text conceals sophisticated layers of
structure. Subsequent work will examine the Voynich text at the word level, for which Voynichese
is much more typical.
37

=== PAGE 38 ===
The following appendices provide some general information about the datasets used in this
paper.
A Voynich Corpus Statistics
This table displays basic statistics for each of the Voynich sample texts in the Maximal transcrip-
tion, broken down by running paragraph text and labels.
Character Character Word Word h2
Count Set Size Count Set Size
Full Voynich Text 234,404 45 37,940 8,172 2.072
Paragraphs 205,014 36 33,111 6,936 2.117
Labels 29,389 36 4,829 2,283 2.309
Voynich A 68,612 36 11,415 3,460 2.122
Paragraphs 66,477 33 11,081 3,281 2.101
Labels 2,134 25 334 289 2.425
Voynich B 145,745 32 23,226 4,947 1.973
Paragraphs 136,046 30 21,632 4,661 1.964
Labels 9,698 26 1,594 778 2.044
Hand 1 64,747 42 10,877 3,260 2.122
Paragraphs 61,963 33 10,352 3,032 2.083
Labels 2,783 31 525 365 2.572
Hand 2 67,929 27 11,070 2,590 1.921
Paragraphs 61,698 27 10,054 2,367 1.910
Labels 6,230 21 1,016 531 1.975
Hand 3 75,182 30 11,755 3,419 1.999
Paragraphs 72,550 30 11,328 3,302 1.991
Labels 2,631 22 427 294 2.086
Hand 4 17,850 25 2,864 1,548 2.279
Paragraphs 2,219 21 353 268 2.083
Labels 15,630 25 2,511 1,399 2.284
Hand 5 5,774 26 930 563 2.111
Paragraphs 3,662 22 580 387 2.079
Labels 2,111 26 350 255 2.055
The following table compares the character set size and conditional character entropy (h2) for
each of the Voynich texts in each of the three transcription systems: Maximal, Maximal Simplified,
and Minimal.
38

=== PAGE 39 ===
Maximal Maximal Simplified Minimal
Full Voynich 45 / 2.114 23 / 2.112 41 / 2.475
Language A 36 / 2.122 22 / 2.119 39 / 2.504
Language B 32 / 1.973 23 / 1.973 40 / 2.304
Hand 1 42 / 2.122 23 / 2.117 40 / 2.506
Hand 2 27 / 1.921 23 / 1.921 39 / 2.219
Hand 3 30 / 1.999 23 / 1.999 39 / 2.338
Hand 4 25 / 2.279 22 / 2.279 36 / 2.558
Hand 5 26 / 2.111 23 / 2.112 31 / 2.319
B Wikipedia Corpus Statistics
The following table gives basic statistics for each of the sample languages in the Wikipedia Corpus:
Language Wikicode Family Script Character Character Word Word h2
Count Set Size Count Set Size
Abkhazian ab Caucasian Cyrillic 474,421 44 58,100 19,109 3.571
Acehnese ace Malayo-Polynesian Latin 566,068 33 90,025 11,400 3.208
Adyghe ady Caucasian Cyrillic 86,867 36 10,791 5,212 3.403
Afrikaans af Germanic Latin 1,228,386 31 198,349 22,349 3.375
Akan ak Niger-Congo Latin 409,746 31 82,731 9,578 3.321
Albanian sq Albanian Latin 1,162,617 30 193,060 29,512 3.387
Alemannic als Germanic Latin 1,197,089 38 197,012 39,254 3.542
Amharic am Afro-Asiatic Ethiopic 940,578 293 193,388 49,646 4.503
AngloSaxon ang Germanic Latin 679,186 41 109,182 26,219 3.605
Arabic ar Afro-Asiatic Arabic 1,164,523 44 195,629 38,372 3.702
Aragonese an Romance Latin 1,170,029 34 210,697 23,412 3.293
Aramaic arc Afro-Asiatic Syriac 52,659 40 9,236 3,853 3.483
Armenian hy Armenian Armenian 1,521,970 40 194,344 36,578 3.376
Aromanian roa_rup Romance Latin 89,929 42 15,126 5,248 3.440
Assamese as Indic Bengali 1,203,527 63 189,182 32,598 3.760
Asturian ast Romance Latin 1,235,937 36 206,485 24,907 3.308
Atikamekw atj Algonquian Latin 245,152 28 34,454 7,904 2.953
Avar av Caucasian Cyrillic 705,663 37 88,140 25,138 3.355
Awadhi awa Indic Devanagari 438,119 69 84,403 14,615 3.746
Aymara ay Aymara Latin 202,890 39 23,822 11,645 3.185
Azerbaijani az Turkic Latin 1,492,347 34 199,917 35,295 3.644
Balinese ban Malayo-Polynesian Latin 1,317,387 27 199,768 25,568 3.180
Bambara bm Mande Latin 122,358 38 25,163 4,806 3.191
Banjar bjn Austronesian Latin 1,371,576 28 199,761 27,426 3.175
Banyumasan map_bms Malayo-Polynesian Latin 1,383,372 28 198,810 23,499 3.257
39

=== PAGE 40 ===
Language Wikicode Family Script Character Character Word Word h2
Count Set Size Count Set Size
Bashkir ba Turkic Cyrillic 1,412,766 42 194,138 37,466 3.691
Basque eu Vasconic Latin 1,540,698 27 199,658 37,568 3.250
Bavarian bar Germanic Latin 1,178,419 34 197,795 41,284 3.550
Belarusian be Slavic Cyrillic 1,383,017 33 192,440 39,472 3.566
Belarusian(Taraškievica) be_x_old Slavic Cyrillic 1,379,366 35 189,806 39,306 3.567
Bengali bn Indic Bengali 1,301,543 62 191,876 28,481 3.665
Bihari bh Indic Devanagari 940,050 68 189,977 18,150 3.618
BishnupriyaManipuri bpy Indic Bengali 517,177 63 79,490 16,408 3.545
Bislama bi Creole Latin 16,041 29 3,145 798 3.126
Bosnian bs Slavic Latin 1,305,485 33 195,997 37,659 3.468
Breton br Celtic Latin 1,095,236 35 206,119 20,998 3.322
Buginese(Buginese) bug Malayo-Polynesian Buginese 11,978 29 2,158 1,153 3.365
Buginese(Latin) bug Malayo-Polynesian Latin 49,167 28 7,126 2,956 3.278
Bulgarian bg Slavic Cyrillic 1,251,467 31 194,249 29,953 3.476
Burmese my Tibeto-Burman Myanmar 1,002,038 62 75,527 44,643 3.324
Buryat bxr Mongolic Cyrillic 1,418,044 35 192,042 38,617 3.503
Cantonese zh_yue Tibeto-Burman Chinese 322,674 3,608 31,888 28,439 5.409
Catalan ca Romance Latin 1,189,313 41 209,944 23,100 3.370
Cebuano ceb Malayo-Polynesian Latin 1,198,584 32 200,597 23,993 3.186
CentralBicolano bcl Malayo-Polynesian Latin 1,197,161 35 197,619 23,546 3.212
Chamorro ch Malayo-Polynesian Latin 37,146 34 6,547 1,903 3.291
Chechen ce Caucasian Cyrillic 1,344,890 35 195,158 43,064 3.672
Cherokee chr Iroquoian Cherokee 57,838 84 11,835 3,777 3.829
Cheyenne chy Algonquian Latin 2,812 39 318 225 3.194
Chichewa ny Niger-Congo Latin 689,446 28 99,634 17,337 3.246
Chinese zh Tibeto-Burman Chinese 1,234,309 6,222 124,650 109,341 6.142
Chuvash cv Turkic Cyrillic 1,184,848 38 188,153 35,546 3.620
ClassicalChinese zh_classical Tibeto-Burman Chinese 80,593 3,292 12,778 11,912 5.176
Cornish kw Celtic Latin 749,995 30 139,379 18,315 3.385
Corsican co Romance Latin 1,134,720 33 207,593 28,600 3.232
Cree cr Algonquian Latin 3,127 29 352 229 2.992
CrimeanTatar crh Turkic Latin 397,729 35 54,339 16,048 3.589
Croatian hr Slavic Latin 1,293,468 32 194,591 39,602 3.464
Czech cs Slavic Latin 1,330,126 41 196,446 40,391 3.745
Danish da Germanic Latin 1,258,211 30 196,664 28,753 3.476
Dinka din Nilotic Latin 331,605 35 64,389 12,093 3.469
Divehi dv Indic Thaana 1,732,631 51 186,755 41,357 3.138
Doteli dty Indic Devanagari 1,170,968 71 187,576 38,443 3.824
Dutch nl Germanic Latin 1,263,624 30 197,198 24,939 3.332
DutchLowSaxon nds_nl Germanic Latin 1,191,824 35 199,215 31,151 3.393
40

=== PAGE 41 ===
Language Wikicode Family Script Character Character Word Word h2
Count Set Size Count Set Size
Dzongkha dz Tibeto-Burman Tibetan 93,231 63 24,147 1,735 3.076
EgyptianArabic arz Afro-Asiatic Arabic 1,078,766 47 195,437 36,930 3.663
Emilian-Romagnol eml Romance Latin 784,411 53 162,961 23,869 3.525
English en Germanic Latin 1,216,023 27 199,564 19,843 3.403
Erzya myv Uralic Cyrillic 1,353,230 34 180,837 44,893 3.518
Esperanto eo Constructed Latin 1,219,760 34 197,285 30,975 3.305
Estonian et Uralic Latin 1,487,423 34 192,800 48,756 3.536
Ewe ee Niger-Congo Latin 94,902 43 18,632 4,058 3.188
Extremaduran ext Romance Latin 1,175,298 35 200,577 31,832 3.354
Faroese fo Germanic Latin 1,181,388 34 191,824 29,506 3.523
FijiHindi hif Indic Latin 706,696 34 128,450 15,253 3.411
Fijian fj Malayo-Polynesian Latin 226,281 27 42,360 4,345 2.888
Finnish fi Uralic Latin 1,728,271 28 196,573 55,335 3.475
Franco-Provençal frp Romance Latin 314,875 41 58,163 12,054 3.461
French fr Romance Latin 1,371,315 39 233,025 23,791 3.354
Friulian fur Romance Latin 1,052,533 38 198,007 21,733 3.284
Fula ff Niger-Congo Latin 238,729 37 40,601 10,899 3.364
Gagauz gag Turkic Latin 484,481 38 67,724 19,070 3.570
Galician gl Romance Latin 1,225,239 34 197,864 23,310 3.314
Gan gan Tibeto-Burman Chinese 48,003 2,938 6,514 5,837 4.597
Georgian ka Kartvelian Georgian 1,590,023 43 190,379 42,981 3.566
German de Germanic Latin 1,411,555 31 197,197 32,028 3.394
Gilaki glk Iranian Arabic 916,037 49 180,675 31,070 3.854
GoanKonkani gom Indic Devanagari 1,317,991 76 197,428 48,971 3.659
Gorontalo gor Malayo-Polynesian Latin 359,794 32 53,579 10,964 3.258
Gothic got Germanic Gothic 63,136 28 9,352 3,598 3.321
Greek el Hellenic Greek 1,270,133 34 192,045 26,770 3.519
Greenlandic kl Inuit Latin 213,944 29 18,203 9,980 3.055
Guarani gn Tupian Latin 1,388,881 48 198,012 32,287 3.435
GuiananCreole gcr Creole Latin 610,232 31 115,926 12,096 3.224
Gujarati gu Indic Gujarati 1,173,177 69 195,421 36,078 3.732
Haitian ht Creole Latin 995,666 35 188,176 20,106 3.385
Hakka hak Tibeto-Burman Latin 369,395 44 84,588 3,607 2.857
Hausa ha Afro-Asiatic Latin 1,116,212 31 200,918 20,315 3.105
Hawaiian haw Malayo-Polynesian Latin 561,237 31 112,870 5,728 2.765
Hebrew he Afro-Asiatic Hebrew 1,123,178 28 194,947 38,482 3.664
HillMari mrj Uralic Cyrillic 630,450 37 91,189 22,380 3.701
Hindi hi Indic Devanagari 1,035,585 71 195,809 20,001 3.623
Hungarian hu Uralic Latin 1,437,916 35 198,457 47,571 3.742
Icelandic is Germanic Latin 1,237,880 36 194,966 33,368 3.596
41

=== PAGE 42 ===
Language Wikicode Family Script Character Character Word Word h2
Count Set Size Count Set Size
Ido io Constructed Latin 1,178,602 33 197,718 20,822 3.329
Igbo ig Niger-Congo Latin 984,726 44 188,440 20,250 3.380
Ilokano ilo Malayo-Polynesian Latin 1,172,160 28 198,139 20,266 3.163
InariSami smn Uralic Latin 260,928 36 34,021 10,928 3.769
Indonesian id Malayo-Polynesian Latin 1,446,218 26 201,308 17,949 3.222
Ingush inh Caucasian Cyrillic 191,553 37 27,865 10,432 3.649
Interlingua ia Constructed Latin 1,195,958 28 195,759 19,769 3.244
Interlingue ie Constructed Latin 1,076,710 38 187,169 18,211 3.380
Inuktitut(CanadianSyllabics) iu Inuit CanadianSyllabics 13,614 117 1,923 1,193 3.732
Inuktitut(Latin) iu Inuit Latin 17,119 25 1,415 1,097 3.129
Inupiak ik Inuit Latin 6,536 39 692 500 3.350
Irish ga Celtic Latin 1,130,156 31 199,466 20,054 3.338
Italian it Romance Latin 1,268,739 33 204,004 26,338 3.272
JamaicanPatois jam Creole Latin 535,308 27 95,784 13,421 3.387
Japanese ja Japonic Japanese 1,015,563 2,887 74,348 60,520 5.027
Javanese jv Malayo-Polynesian Latin 1,351,976 29 199,101 27,774 3.238
KabardianCircassian kbd Caucasian Cyrillic 693,947 35 91,720 30,563 3.367
Kabiye kbp Niger-Congo Latin 1,104,123 40 206,498 22,038 3.302
Kabyle kab Afro-Asiatic Latin 1,130,890 39 210,877 30,148 3.458
Kalmyk xal Mongolic Cyrillic 149,170 41 23,437 9,615 3.863
Kannada kn Dravidian Kannada 1,633,412 66 198,531 57,666 3.773
Kapampangan pam Malayo-Polynesian Latin 1,207,315 31 193,277 23,199 3.063
Karachay-Balkar krc Turkic Cyrillic 1,138,595 34 145,979 31,559 3.476
Karakalpak kaa Turkic Latin 958,773 37 121,182 32,916 3.509
Kashmiri(Arabic) ks Indic Arabic 34,438 79 6,201 2,922 3.872
Kashmiri(Devanagari) ks Indic Devanagari 22,493 69 3,641 2,093 3.864
Kashubian csb Slavic Latin 792,280 40 120,564 37,608 3.750
Kazakh kk Turkic Cyrillic 1,478,373 40 195,972 38,033 3.496
Khmer km Austroasiatic Khmer 654,815 79 28,173 21,384 4.138
Kikuyu ki Niger-Congo Latin 62,285 32 10,016 3,532 3.152
Kinyarwanda rw Niger-Congo Latin 840,081 29 126,721 20,888 3.136
Kirghiz ky Turkic Cyrillic 1,477,252 37 194,186 37,921 3.605
Kirundi rn Niger-Congo Latin 218,081 28 32,282 8,974 3.074
Komi kv Uralic Cyrillic 952,576 36 139,004 30,271 3.706
Komi-Permyak koi Uralic Cyrillic 547,852 36 82,138 18,841 3.743
Kongo kg Niger-Congo Latin 126,751 38 21,763 4,324 3.141
Korean ko Koreanic Hangul 817,046 1,379 203,285 65,252 4.685
Kotava avk Constructed Latin 1,160,948 30 190,260 33,067 3.454
Kurdish ku Iranian Latin 1,097,852 35 201,217 29,586 3.386
Ladin lld Romance Latin 597,615 46 114,922 18,314 3.394
42

=== PAGE 43 ===
Language Wikicode Family Script Character Character Word Word h2
Count Set Size Count Set Size
Ladino lad Romance Latin 1,115,534 32 193,345 26,514 3.305
Lak lbe Caucasian Cyrillic 170,141 36 22,564 5,981 3.454
Lao lo Tai Lao 343,956 55 21,063 13,620 4.030
Latgalian ltg Baltic Latin 299,177 36 41,482 13,350 3.606
Latin la Romance Latin 1,430,965 28 193,514 42,260 3.412
Latvian lv Baltic Latin 1,408,947 36 193,369 36,694 3.634
Lezgian lez Caucasian Cyrillic 1,426,123 33 194,005 32,609 3.411
Ligurian lij Romance Latin 1,108,522 51 214,470 37,687 3.475
Limburgish li Germanic Latin 1,193,438 34 201,569 27,862 3.436
Lingala ln Niger-Congo Latin 383,704 46 64,511 11,314 3.222
LinguaFrancaNova lfn Constructed Latin 1,022,406 28 196,299 15,063 3.111
Lithuanian lt Baltic Latin 1,477,695 36 194,671 43,340 3.573
Livvi-Karelian olo Uralic Latin 987,848 31 126,766 33,422 3.571
Lojban jbo Constructed Latin 288,970 28 59,390 6,453 3.140
Lombard lmo Romance Latin 1,036,268 41 208,682 29,793 3.444
LowSaxon nds Germanic Latin 1,177,767 30 199,049 27,399 3.390
LowerSorbian dsb Slavic Latin 863,845 39 131,759 30,568 3.626
Luganda lg Niger-Congo Latin 1,427,630 27 204,897 31,783 3.158
Luxembourgisch lb Germanic Latin 1,254,155 33 200,807 28,191 3.423
Macedonian mk Slavic Cyrillic 1,302,905 31 199,719 30,368 3.407
Madurese mad Malayo-Polynesian Latin 312,666 34 46,468 8,560 3.394
Maithili mai Indic Devanagari 1,105,898 73 186,573 34,716 3.831
Malagasy mg Malayo-Polynesian Latin 1,245,462 34 186,592 21,030 2.944
Malay ms Malayo-Polynesian Latin 1,406,260 27 198,741 18,313 3.186
Malayalam ml Dravidian Malayalam 797,436 77 78,073 35,542 3.702
Maltese mt Afro-Asiatic Latin 1,418,795 32 241,726 24,892 3.515
Manx gv Celtic Latin 1,166,926 33 208,179 18,495 3.373
Maori mi Malayo-Polynesian Latin 417,506 33 88,263 6,548 2.875
Marathi mr Indic Devanagari 1,297,866 78 188,409 42,414 3.689
Mazandarani mzn Iranian Arabic 993,445 46 193,871 24,773 3.660
MeadowMari mhr Uralic Cyrillic 1,371,590 38 199,570 34,921 3.549
MinDong cdo Tibeto-Burman Latin 430,592 48 101,336 2,796 2.841
MinNan zh_min_nan Tibeto-Burman Latin 1,267,107 49 309,129 8,318 3.066
Minangkabau min Malayo-Polynesian Latin 1,083,848 27 158,742 19,545 3.181
Mingrelian xmf Kartvelian Georgian 1,452,488 40 187,555 49,075 3.580
Mirandese mwl Romance Latin 1,210,157 33 203,845 22,829 3.309
Moksha mdf Moksha Cyrillic 254,066 34 34,186 12,397 3.474
Mon mnw Austroasiatic Myanmar 510,675 74 42,496 24,496 3.570
Mongolian mn Mongolic Cyrillic 1,321,073 35 193,476 29,282 3.559
MoroccanArabic ary Afro-Asiatic Arabic 792,354 46 143,786 29,576 3.725
43

=== PAGE 44 ===
Language Wikicode Family Script Character Character Word Word h2
Count Set Size Count Set Size
N’Ko nqo Mande N’Ko 1,122,166 48 196,488 22,518 2.970
Nahuatl nah Uto-Aztecan Latin 508,194 36 62,805 15,605 3.227
Nauruan na Malayo-Polynesian Latin 59,243 51 9,774 2,819 3.405
Navajo nv Athabaskan Latin 202,428 37 28,125 7,125 3.366
Neapolitan nap Romance Latin 1,031,893 40 185,831 32,261 3.291
Nepali ne Indic Devanagari 1,170,229 68 179,096 36,637 3.770
Newar new Tibeto-Burman Devanagari 770,077 76 122,917 27,822 3.750
Nias nia Malayo-Polynesian Latin 293,580 29 52,144 7,274 3.077
Norfolk pih Creole Latin 114,354 34 21,202 5,008 3.497
Norman nrm Romance Latin 877,907 41 165,642 20,754 3.364
NorthFrisian frr Germanic Latin 1,073,028 36 191,321 26,674 3.499
NorthernSami se Uralic Latin 793,557 41 100,856 26,797 3.607
NorthernSotho nso Niger-Congo Latin 137,660 30 25,626 4,583 2.950
Norwegian(Bokmaål) no Germanic Latin 1,247,199 32 196,357 29,556 3.475
Norwegian(Nynorsk) nn Germanic Latin 1,185,458 32 193,537 27,119 3.496
Novial nov Constructed Latin 220,177 33 38,318 8,423 3.325
Occitan oc Romance Latin 1,238,392 38 208,924 20,667 3.358
OldChurchSlavonic cu Slavic Cyrillic 68,106 50 10,108 3,258 3.398
Oriya or Indic Odia 1,249,524 66 184,928 32,844 3.742
Oromo om Afro-Asiatic Latin 1,625,327 29 233,367 40,522 3.193
Ossetian os Iranian Cyrillic 1,198,686 33 194,122 34,753 3.651
PalatinateGerman pfl Germanic Latin 1,250,014 38 197,124 42,618 3.440
Pali(Devanagari) pi Indic Devanagari 7,512 62 1,157 686 3.694
Pali(Latin) pi Indic Latin 56,922 32 5,971 1,953 2.905
Pangasinan pag Malayo-Polynesian Latin 176,803 27 31,387 6,904 3.166
Papiamentu pap Creole Latin 1,049,584 38 195,235 20,194 3.344
Pashto ps Iranian Arabic 892,610 52 196,694 25,578 3.651
PennsylvaniaGerman pdc Germanic Latin 226,954 31 37,682 8,436 3.381
Persian fa Iranian Arabic 1,024,245 42 197,880 19,807 3.651
Picard pcd Romance Latin 543,922 39 102,478 17,963 3.397
Piedmontese pms Romance Latin 1,062,707 35 218,355 19,308 3.318
Polish pl Slavic Latin 1,410,675 35 195,119 44,911 3.638
Pontic pnt Hellenic Greek 127,501 38 20,894 6,214 3.534
Portuguese pt Romance Latin 1,235,214 39 198,672 22,429 3.316
Punjabi pa Indic Gurmukhi 970,590 64 195,713 22,171 3.577
Quechua qu Quechua Latin 335,139 35 40,329 14,685 3.197
Ripuarian ksh Germanic Latin 1,110,517 35 198,243 34,554 3.556
Romani rmy Indic Latin 91,925 38 15,487 4,116 3.294
Romanian ro Romance Latin 1,348,034 31 210,279 28,217 3.416
Romansh rm Romance Latin 1,203,902 34 208,626 18,734 3.306
44

=== PAGE 45 ===
Language Wikicode Family Script Character Character Word Word h2
Count Set Size Count Set Size
Russian ru Slavic Cyrillic 1,500,801 34 200,538 40,697 3.619
Rusyn rue Slavic Cyrillic 1,244,127 38 187,752 48,078 3.740
Saaraiki skr Indic Arabic 927,476 57 197,187 23,313 3.679
Sakha sah Turkic Cyrillic 1,488,350 39 191,813 44,495 3.617
Sakizaya szy Austronesian Latin 1,067,950 27 194,641 13,539 2.948
Samoan sm Malayo-Polynesian Latin 399,484 32 83,345 6,083 2.992
Samogitian bat_smg Baltic Latin 719,074 36 105,660 34,440 3.599
Sango sg Niger-Congo Latin 17,054 38 3,746 640 2.862
Sanskrit sa Indic Devanagari 1,507,088 76 177,498 60,631 3.728
Santali sat Austroasiatic OlChiki 1,013,781 37 187,788 19,498 3.391
Sardinian sc Romance Latin 1,157,097 33 204,144 32,653 3.230
SaterlandFrisian stq Germanic Latin 1,146,938 30 186,897 25,801 3.384
Scots sco Germanic Latin 1,122,338 27 199,515 22,474 3.417
ScottishGaelic gd Celtic Latin 1,137,203 33 206,651 18,580 3.145
Serbian sr Slavic Cyrillic 1,241,960 31 190,415 38,120 3.458
Serbo-Croatian sh Slavic Latin 1,271,863 31 192,522 40,828 3.472
Sesotho st Niger-Congo Latin 303,739 28 55,756 7,713 3.004
Shan shn Tai Myanmar 494,159 105 31,048 22,064 3.154
Shona sn Niger-Congo Latin 626,613 27 76,706 22,057 3.169
Sicilian scn Romance Latin 1,198,370 38 204,500 29,579 3.214
Silesian szl Slavic Latin 891,117 46 132,556 42,331 3.767
SimpleEnglish simple Germanic Latin 1,128,909 27 198,481 14,313 3.362
Sindhi sd Indic Arabic 875,905 62 184,506 20,142 3.694
Sinhalese si Indic Sinhala 1,182,228 76 188,511 34,716 3.799
Slovak sk Slavic Latin 1,343,586 42 195,932 42,027 3.737
Slovenian sl Slavic Latin 1,039,854 31 161,193 29,227 3.516
Somali so Afro-Asiatic Latin 1,245,451 28 194,843 30,491 3.268
Sorani ckb Iranian Arabic 1,220,535 39 194,694 38,589 3.452
SouthAzerbaijani azb Turkic Arabic 1,325,401 49 194,657 50,268 3.717
Spanish es Romance Latin 1,251,204 33 202,983 23,801 3.291
Sranan srn Creole Latin 61,506 35 12,032 2,520 3.185
Sundanese su Malayo-Polynesian Latin 703,485 28 103,181 14,482 3.368
Swahili sw Niger-Congo Latin 1,233,964 26 195,587 21,695 3.084
Swati ss Niger-Congo Latin 201,303 29 23,888 10,554 3.195
Swedish sv Germanic Latin 1,301,628 31 198,498 32,104 3.539
Tagalog tl Malayo-Polynesian Latin 1,213,045 27 196,218 19,488 3.059
Tahitian ty Malayo-Polynesian Latin 16,927 43 3,858 694 2.846
Tajik tg Iranian Cyrillic 1,248,236 40 190,743 34,147 3.614
Tamil ta Dravidian Tamil 1,783,419 49 192,511 58,671 3.327
Tarantino roa_tara Romance Latin 1,148,683 35 205,377 21,844 3.109
45

=== PAGE 46 ===
Language Wikicode Family Script Character Character Word Word h2
Count Set Size Count Set Size
Tatar(Cyrillic) tt Turkic Cyrillic 940,273 38 128,935 27,004 3.670
Tatar(Latin) tt Turkic Latin 429,020 41 60,991 18,904 3.749
Telugu te Dravidian Telugu 1,551,065 67 193,017 56,921 3.783
Tetum tet Malayo-Polynesian Latin 660,727 37 108,003 14,469 3.446
Thai th Tai Thai 953,229 68 38,480 27,031 4.247
Tibetan bo Tibeto-Burman Tibetan 1,655,843 83 428,495 6,127 3.143
Tigrinya ti Afro-Asiatic Ethiopic 96,980 230 21,081 7,467 4.401
TokPisin tpi Creole Latin 87,118 27 16,046 2,136 3.135
Tongan to Malayo-Polynesian Latin 167,431 34 36,884 3,972 2.945
Tsonga ts Niger-Congo Latin 522,298 28 88,346 11,540 2.970
Tswana tn Niger-Congo Latin 1,068,169 28 203,475 16,097 2.816
Tulu tcy Dravidian Kannada 1,243,356 68 168,376 51,885 3.695
Tumbuka tum Niger-Congo Latin 62,879 29 9,480 2,803 2.979
Turkish tr Turkic Latin 1,503,312 34 202,601 39,777 3.549
Turkmen tk Turkic Latin 1,510,318 37 202,877 43,688 3.603
Tuvan tyv Turkic Cyrillic 1,451,621 40 208,827 34,787 3.494
Twi tw Niger-Congo Latin 173,715 30 35,061 5,612 3.289
Udmurt udm Uralic Cyrillic 539,349 40 75,154 19,440 3.669
Ukrainian uk Slavic Cyrillic 1,401,545 34 193,133 40,936 3.653
UpperSorbian hsb Slavic Latin 1,272,611 38 190,832 32,500 3.559
Urdu ur Indic Arabic 912,459 52 195,713 15,390 3.575
Uyghur ug Turkic Arabic 1,257,845 39 164,208 31,147 3.479
Uzbek uz Turkic Latin 1,548,096 29 197,038 37,078 3.436
Venda ve Niger-Congo Latin 99,874 30 17,566 3,452 2.792
Venetian vec Romance Latin 1,046,029 37 200,507 30,156 3.265
Vepsian vep Uralic Latin 1,366,394 30 179,658 23,467 3.501
Vietnamese vi Austroasiatic Latin 901,129 92 200,641 6,639 3.168
Volapük vo Constructed Latin 1,001,117 30 163,340 14,480 3.237
Võro fiu_vro Uralic Latin 829,521 34 122,791 31,833 3.635
Walloon wa Romance Latin 1,006,614 37 197,108 20,966 3.379
Waray-Waray war Malayo-Polynesian Latin 1,170,812 32 200,277 19,247 3.133
Welsh cy Celtic Latin 1,125,686 32 204,242 19,707 3.465
WestFlemish vls Germanic Latin 1,123,656 32 200,520 30,198 3.434
WestFrisian fy Germanic Latin 1,127,112 33 194,755 21,690 3.374
WesternArmenian hyw Armenian Armenian 1,406,809 41 196,090 42,235 3.479
WesternPunjabi pnb Indic Arabic 922,341 50 196,296 18,042 3.595
Wolof wo Niger-Congo Latin 983,997 34 203,888 11,051 3.292
Wu wuu Tibeto-Burman Chinese 54,268 3,187 6,303 5,755 4.388
Xhosa xh Niger-Congo Latin 1,064,361 29 130,727 41,754 3.267
Yiddish yi Germanic Hebrew 1,133,439 30 199,605 18,652 3.311
46

=== PAGE 47 ===
Language Wikicode Family Script Character Character Word Word h2
Count Set Size Count Set Size
Yoruba yo Niger-Congo Latin 683,230 43 153,063 18,010 3.591
ZamboangaChavacano cbk_zam Creole Latin 1,147,970 33 195,097 24,341 3.310
Zazaki diq Iranian Latin 1,093,565 38 198,835 35,611 3.528
Zeelandic zea Germanic Latin 1,135,510 36 204,440 29,827 3.388
Zhuang za Tai Latin 28,961 29 4,509 1,599 3.069
Zulu zu Niger-Congo Latin 866,234 28 102,758 33,905 3.262
47

=== PAGE 48 ===
C Historical Corpus Statistics
The following table gives basic statistics for each of the Historical Texts, along with separate statis-
tics for parallel texts with normalized and diplomatic versions.
Text Language Script Character Character Word Word h2
Count Set Size Count Set Size
Medical Casebooks English Latin
Normalized 3,057 884 15,195 41 3.418
Diplomatic 3,069 901 14,646 54 3.435
Three Books of English Latin 56,914 6,675 314,259 28 3.241
Occult Philosophy
Science of Cirurgie English Latin 97,949 7,443 483,823 30 3.240
Secretum Secretorum English Latin 18,350 2,754 96,373 27 3.111
Alphabet of Tales English Latin 177,763 14,083 891,000 33 3.254
Amiran-Darejaniani Georgian Georgian 45,169 12,888 336,149 37 3.420
Mishneh Torah Hebrew Hebrew 27,261 7,857 143,516 29 3.637
Masoretic Tanakh (Bereshit) Hebrew Hebrew
Without niqqud 17,802 6,327 99,024 29 3.526
With niqqud 17,802 7,091 164,569 43 3.256
Codex Wormianus Icelandic Latin
Normalized 31,592 8,393 162,890 48 3.390
Diplomatic 31,442 8,637 150,374 60 3.490
La Rettorica Italian Latin 32,230 6,789 198,138 29 3.141
Necrologium Lundense Latin Latin
Normalized 309 222 1,723 72 3.348
Diplomatic 314 194 2,046 41 3.204
De Ortu Et Tempo Latin Latin 1,939 975 13,078 24 3.252
Antichristi
Historia Hierosylmitanae Latin Latin 125,987 20,082 900,781 27 3.368
Expeditionis
De Magia Latin Latin 11,790 4,067 81,028 24 3.315
Secretum Secretorum Latin Latin 39,349 9,294 262,206 25 3.277
Steganographia Latin Latin 21,529 7,559 154,739 33 3.424
Sindbad-Name Persian Arabic 19,751 8,672 103,002 68 3.871
Picatrix Spanish Latin 110,684 19,420 642,787 32 3.244
48

=== PAGE 49 ===
D The Sukhotin Algorithm for Vowel Detection
The Sukhotin Algorithm is a procedure for determining which characters of an encoded text are
vowels(Sukhotin1962, Guy1991b). Guy(1991a)appliedthealgorithmtotwofoliosoftheVoynich
text. ForfurtherdiscussionoftheSukhotinalgorithmanditsusageinVoynichanalysis,seeBowern
and Lindemann (2020).
The vowel determination for Voynichese is slightly different between Voynich languages, and
is heavily dependent upon the transcription system. Here we present the vowel determination
results of the Sukhotin Algorithm for multiple languages and scripts in comparison to Voynichese.
We include two results: one in which spaces between words are included as a separate character
(designated by the # symbol), and one in which they are ignored. If spaces are included, they are
almost always identified first by the algorithm, and the overall results are better. In most cases,
the exclusion of spaces produces a similar result, but may include consonants that are ‘vowel-like’
(e.g. y) or tend to be found at the beginning or end of words.
Figure20: ResultsoftheSukhotinAlgorithmforWikipediaSamplesintheLatinalphabet(English,
French, German), Greek alphabet (Greek), and Georgian alphabet (Georgian).
Figure 20 shows the results for the Wikipedia samples of English, French, German, Greek,
Russian, and Georgian, which are written in the Latin, Greek, Cyrillic, and Georgian alphabets.
Running the algorithm with spaces does a fairly good job of picking out the vowels exhaustively
and exclusively. Without spaces, the algorithm picks out t in English, which is the first letter of
the most common word. German also includes the characters c and h, which are commonly used in
digraphs. For Georgian, the results are mixed: including spaces, the algorithm correctly identifies
the vowels but includes some consonants as well, and it does worse if spaces are excluded.
49

=== PAGE 50 ===
Figure 21: Results of the Sukhotin Algorithm for Wikipedia Samples in the Hebrew and Arabic
abjads and the Devanagari abugida (Hindi).
Figure 21 shows the results of the Sukhotin algorithm for Wikipedia samples of languages in
three non-alphabetic scripts: Hebrew, Arabic, and Devanagari (run on the Hindi sample). Hebrew
and Arabic are abjads which do not include vowels.37 The algorithm identifies some consonants
which double as vowels, but otherwise has a tendency to identify the final or initial forms of
consonants, particularly if spaces are excluded. In Arabic the harakat vowel marking is identified
first. The algorithm is somewhat successful for Hindi, written in an abugida (alphasyllabary).
Without spaces, it initially identifies the freestanding forms of the vowels, and then the separate
combining forms of the vowels. With spaces, it only includes the combining forms.
Figure 22 shows the results of the Sukhotin algorithm for Full Voynich, A, and B in each of
the three transcriptions. In the Maximal Simplified transcription, the algorithm identifies common
characters which are found primarily in the middle of words and which bear a resemblance to
Latin script vowels (a, c, h, i, and o). The only difference between A and B is whether c and h
are included. Without spaces, the algorithm additionally identifies word-finals: n, y, and g. For
Voynich B it also identifies the rare character symbol, and the f gallows character which marks the
beginning of a paragraph.
In the full Maximal transcription, the algorithm identifies the same characters as vowels, but
the results are swamped by the addition of the ligature forms of consonants and vowels, and, when
spaces are excluded, other extremely rare characters. Similarly, in the Minimal transcription the
same characters are identified as vowels, with the exception of i and the inclusion of the digraph
ee. Characters which are only found at the beginning of the words are also included: q, X, Q, and
S and C.
TheSukhotinalgorithmisbasedupontheobservationthatvowelsaremorelikelytobeadjacent
to consonants than to other vowels (Guy 1991b). This generalization is ultimately a reflection of
universal properties of sonority in the world’s languages, but its validity for any one language
is subject to phonotactics (language-particular rules about possible phoneme sequences) and the
peculiarities of the script. In addition to identifying vowels, it tends to identify rare characters and
word-initial/final characters.
37For Hebrew and Arabic the ordering of results is given from right to left to reflect the order in which these
characters are read. Devanagari is ordered from left to right.
50

=== PAGE 51 ===
Figure 22: Results of the Sukhotin Algorithm for Voynichese in the Maximal Simplified, Full
51
Maximal, and Minimal transcriptions.

=== PAGE 52 ===
References
Amancio,D.R.,Altmann,E.G.,Rybski,D.,OliveiraJr,O.N.,andCosta,L.d.F.(2013). Probing
the statistical properties of unknown texts: application to the voynich manuscript. PLoS One,
8(7).
Barlow, M. (1986). The Voynich Manuscript - By Voynich? Cryptologia, 10(4):210–216. Citation
Key Alias: barlow1986a.
Bennett, W. R. (1976). Scientific and engineering problem-solving with the computer, chapter 4.
Language, pages 103–198. Prentice Hall series in automatic computation. Prentice Hall, Engle-
wood Cliffs, N.J.
Bowern, C. and Lindemann, L. (2020). The Linguistics of the Voynich Manuscript. Annual Review
of Linguistics.
Currier, P. (1976). Papers on the Voynich Manuscript. In D’Imperio, M., editor, New Research on
the Voynich Manuscript, Washington, DC.
Davis, L. F. (2020). How many glyphs and how many scribes: Digital paleography and the voynich
manuscript. Manuscript Studies, V(1):162–178.
Guy, J. B. (1991a). Statistical properties of two folios of the Voynich Manuscript. Cryptologia,
15(3):207–218.
Guy, J. B. (1991b). Vowel identification: an old (but good) algorithm. Cryptologia, 15(3):258–262.
Landini, G. (2001). Evidence of linguistic structure in the Voynich manuscript using spectral
analysis. Cryptologia, 25(4):275–295.
Reddy, S. and Knight, K. (2011). What we know about the Voynich manuscript. In Proceedings
of the 5th ACL-HLT workshop on language technology for cultural heritage, social sciences, and
humanities, pages 78–86. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Rugg, G. (2004). An elegant hoax? a possible solution to the voynich manuscript. Cryptologia,
28(1):31–46.
Stallings, D. (1998). Understanding the second-order entropies of Voynich text. http://ixoloxi.
com/voynich/mbpaper.htm.
Sukhotin, B. (1962). Eksperimental’noe vydelenie klassov bukv s pomoscju evm. Problemy struk-
turnoj lingvistiki, 234:189–206.
Timm, T. and Schinner, A. (2020). A possible generating algorithm of the Voynich manuscript.
Cryptologia, 44(1):1–19.
Timm, T. and Schinner, A. (2021). Review of the linguistics of the voynich manuscript by claire
bowern and luke lindemann. Cryptologia, 0(0):1–5.
Zandbergen, R. (2010). Voynich ms. http://www.voynich.nu/index.html. [Online; accessed
24-April-2018].
52

=== PAGE 53 ===
Zandbergen, R. (2021). The cardan grille approach to the voynich ms taken to the next level.
arXiv:2104.12548 [cs]. arXiv: 2104.12548.
53