=== PAGE 1 ===
The Linguistics of the Voynich Manuscript
Claire L. Bowern1 and Luke Lindemann2
1DepartmentofLinguistics,YaleUniversity,NewHaven,Connecticut,06511;email: claire.bowern@yale.edu
2YaleCenterforMedicalInformatics,YaleUniversity,NewHaven,Connecticutand
VeteransAffairs,OﬀiceofAcademicAﬀiliation,WestHaven,Connecticut;email: luke.lindemann@yale.edu
September 8, 2020
Abstract
The Voynich Manuscript is a 15th Century illustrated cipher manuscript. In this
overview of recent approaches to the Voynich manuscript, we summarize and evaluate
current work on the language that underlies this document. We provide arguments for
treatingthedocumentasnaturallanguage(ratherthanamedievalhoax)andshowhow
we can make statistical arguments about the phonology, morphology, and structure of
the document, even though the contents remain undecipherable.
1 THE VOYNICH MANUSCRIPT
1
1.1 Introduction
Manuscript 408 in Yale University’s Beinecke Library2 — otherwise known as the Voynich
Manuscript — is a curious five-part codex written in an unknown language and unknown
script. It has captured the imagination of cryptographers and linguists and is the subject of
numerous claims about its content (Kennedy and Churchill, 2004). While some argue that
the work is a hoax (modern or medieval) or gibberish, others have advanced claims for what
language the text is written in, or the type of cipher that may have been used to encode the
text. There is at present no consensus on the language underlying the manuscript.
In this review, we survey linguistic aspects of the Voynich manuscript and summarize
issues around decipherment. That is, we concentrate on features of the text: “phonology”,
morphology, and syntax, to shed light on the question of gibberish versus natural language
(on the one hand), and encoded known language versus otherwise unattested language on
the other.
1This is a preprint of a article forthcoming in the Annual Review of Linguistics.
2Highresolutionimagesofallpagesareavailablefromhttps://brbl-dl.library.yale.edu/vufind/Record/3519597.
1

=== PAGE 2 ===
Figure1: Pages19r, 69v, and105vofthemanuscript, illustratingsomeofthesubjectthemes.
Credit: Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Yale University
The manuscript itself is bound in vellum (the binding is old but not original). The
Voynich Manuscript has 116 folios (that is, 232 pages), bound in 18 quires of varying size.
Several pages are clearly missing. Thematically, the manuscript has 5 parts. The longest,
covering over half the manuscript, contains drawings of plants (Folio 19r in Figure 1 is
an example). The astrology section (e.g. 69v) contains astral charts, a zodiac, and other
diagrams which may be related to astrology but which are not currently identifiable. The so-
called ‘balneological’ section is almost unparalleled elsewhere; it is text illustrated by naked
women in green water.3 The fourth section shows illustrations of medical bottles and plant
roots, while the fifth is unillustrated and consists of a set of paragraphs demarcated by stars
(see folio 105v in Figure 1). Some pages are fold-outs. The text is written in iron-gall ink
(typically of manuscripts of the time) and the illustrations are ink and pigment.
The manuscript is named after the book dealer, Wilfrid Voynich, who acquired it from
the Villa Mondragone (outside of Rome) in 1911 or 1912. The villa housed a former Jesuit
library and was sold in about 1874; presumably the manuscript was in the collection before
that. The circumstances around the acquisition of the manuscript are unclear. Voynich
was very circumspect at the time, and the manuscript does not appear to have the usual
information about provenance that other manuscript purchases had, adding to the mystery
surrounding the manuscript. Following Voynich’s death, it passed to his wife, the novelist
Ethel Voynich. The manuscript was donated to Yale’s Beinecke Library in 1969 by H.P.
Kraus. More information about these points can be found in Kennedy and Churchill (2004)
and on the site voynich.nu.
The Voynich Manuscript may seem like a curious topic for a linguistics article, given that
the language of the manuscript is unknown. We argue that it is an opportunity to address
this problem by applying methods related to uncovering linguistic structure. That is, we
use insights from typology, language documentation, and statistical arguments related to a
wide variety of languages (ancient, medieval, and modern) to shed light on the properties
3Some have seen parallels between the balneological section and illustrated medieval women’s health
manuals, such as the Trotula. It should be noted, however, that while the Trotula’s illustrations are readily
interpretable to anyone with a passing knowledge of childbirth, but the same cannot be said of the Voynich
Manuscript’s.
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
of the linguistic system underlying “Voynichese”. Moreover, much work that attempts to
decipher the manuscript is claimed to do so on linguistic principles, and should be evaluated
on linguistic principles as well (see §5 below).
In §1 we give some brief information about the manuscript and summarize arguments
over whether the text is linguistic material – that is, whether the Voynich manuscript is
gibberish, a constructed language, or natural language. In §2 we give an overview of the
script and phonology. In §3 we discuss the morphology (word-internal structure), and §4
discusses syntax and discourse structure of the Voynich manuscript. §5 discusses some of
the current theories as to the language underlying the manuscript.
In our investigations of the Voynich manuscript, we do not take a traditional decipher-
ment approach as had been used by early cryptogrpahic analyses (Currier, 1976; D’Imperio,
1978). Rather, we draw on our experience as documentary linguists to deduce aspects of lin-
guistic structure, and we use our cross-linguistic experience as typologists to compare those
structures and attempt to narrow down the possible target languages. Our aim is to shed
light on the composition of the Voynich manuscript by making two types of tests: compar-
ing known languages, and comparing enciphered tests of known languages which manipulate
strings in various ways. While this is very unlikely to give us a direct language match, it
does provide us with useful information about how sensitive tests are to both morphology
and encipherment methods. This allows us to rule in or rule out various language families.
Our comparisons are based on a corpus of historical materials and a cleaned sample of lan-
guage data from Wikipedia. For more information on the corpus see Lindemann and Bowern
(2020).
Inthisarticleweconcentrateonwhatweknowaboutthelanguageofthemanuscript, and
not about its thematic content or the historical context of its composition, though both are
important. We also do not address the history of the manuscript following its composition
or construction.4
We hope this overview will ground some of the discussions about the manuscript and
guide plausibility of theories, as well as giving an example of the ways in which it can be
useful to consider language documentary methods in ancient languages and cryptographic
problems.
1.2 Natural language or gibberish
The first question about the manuscript for an article like this is whether the “language” of
the Voynich manuscript is natural language at all. That is, it could be gibberish of some
type, a hoax made to look like a cipher. Proponents of the gibberish hypothesis point out
the abnormal regularity and high degree of similarity in some adjacent words, which make
it look rather unlike many other types of text (cf. Barlow, 1986). The linguistic status of
the Voynich Manuscript has been the subject of controversy. At the same time as authors
such as Reddy and Knight (2011) and Hauer and Kondrak (2016) work from principles of
decipherment, others have claimed to show that the Voynich “language” is not language at
all. Rugg (2004); Rugg and Taylor (2016) suggests that the language could be generated
4We recognize, however, that the circumstances of composition are very relevant to the language. For
example,ifMS408isa15thcenturycopyofapossiblymuchearlierwork,thatchangesthelanguageswhich
may likely underlie the manuscript text.
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
by a 15th Century cryptographic techniques, which could produce either enciphered text or
gibberish. Rugg (2004) introduces explanation of the Cardan grille technique, while Rugg
and Taylor (2016) suggests that the material is more compatible with hoax than enciphered
language. Daruka (2020) and Timm and Schinner (2020) likewise comes to the conclusion
that the Voynich Manuscript is a hoax and contains gibberish, though created by different
means than those suggested by Rugg. As shown by Montemurro et al. (2013), Landini
(2001), Reddy and Knight (2011), and Sterneck and Bowern (2020), however, the gibberish
account does not explain the higher level document structure that we discuss further in §4.
That is, it is implausible for a “fake” gibberish-based document to have internal structure
of this type, and it is more likely that the Voynich manuscript is a cipher or other encoding
of a natural language.
We are not, at this stage, persuaded by any of the arguments in favor of Voynich being
gibberish. In essence, because gibberish is by nature random, it should not display any of the
higher level organizational properties that The Voynich Manuscript displays (as summarized
here in §3.3 and §4). The Voynich Manuscript is highly unusual and non-language like at the
characterlevel. Formeasuresthatlookabovethewordtolineandparagraph,aswellasinthe
distribution of words across the manuscript, it looks like a natural language. This strongly
implies that the manuscript is encoded natural language rather than gibberish, since the
measures used to track the paragraph structure are very unlikely to be directly manipulated
and so are a good indicator of real structure. If we rule out gibberish, the question then
becomes what type of “encoding” is represented by the Voynich writing system. While this is
stillunknown, sometypesofcodecanprobablyberuledout. Itisveryunlikelytobeasimple
substitution cipher, for example, simply because it should have been deciphered by now if
so. Conversely, polyalphabetic ciphers are unlikely both because they were probably not
used in the early 15th century, and because a polyalphabetic cipher would lead to identical
words being encoded differently in different parts of the manuscripts. We would not see the
same (or similar) words being the most frequent on every page (see §3).
Finally,themanuscriptcouldbeinaconstructedlanguage(‘conlang’). Toourknowledge,
the most extensive pre-modern conlang is the Turkish, Persian and Arabic-based language
Balaibalan (Haeberl, 2015; Koc, 2005). Balaibalan was a Sufi esoteric language, represented
in 3 manuscripts dating from roughly 1580 but likely a collective effort at composition over
many years. There are two other well attested ancient conlangs, Latin and German-based
Lingua Ignota, created by Hildegard von Bingen (Higley, 2007) in the 12th Century, and
Enochian, an “angelic” English-like language invented in the 16th Century by Edward Kelly
and John Dee (Laycock, 2001). All three conlangs are heavily based on natural languages
and consist of embedding made-up roots in the morphology and syntax of natural languages.
ThusifVoynicheseisaconlang, wemightexpectittopatternmorphosyntacticallywithother
natural languages, but be anomalous at the root level.
1.3 Background to the manuscript
In the discussion that follows we assume some points which are still debated (to our minds
unproductively) in Voynich studies. First, we proceed on the basis of the carbon dates
of the vellum (and overall appearance and views of experts in medieval studies) that the
manuscript is a genuine medieval object (Clement, 1997; Harkness, 2016) and not a modern
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
forgery. Those who assume that the manuscript is a modern hoax must assume that Voynich
(or another person) obtained a large amount of untouched medieval parchment, and made
ink highly consistent with medieval practices, in an era before methods for accurate dating of
parchment had been developed. That is, they must anachronistically assume that a modern
hoaxer was trying to prevent detection by circumventing tests that had not, at that point,
yet been invented.
WealsoconsideritunlikelythattheTheVoynichManuscriptisanancienthoax. Thecost
associated with the production of sucha manuscriptand the number of people involvedmake
it unlikely that it was created purely to deceive. A much smaller hoax would have served the
same purpose with much less expense. Moreover, people who assume that the manuscript is
a medieval gibberish hoax massively underestimate the amount of effort required to produce
sustained language-like nonsense.5
The physical codex dates from 1404–1438 (Harkness, 2016) based on carbon dating but
we do not know if the extant physical codex was copied from some earlier source. For this
reason, we do not assume that the language must be medieval. Following Davis (2020) we
assume multiple scribes. She provides evidence from the glyph shape that at least four (and
more likely five) different hands were involved in the production of the manuscript.
Following Currier (1976); Davis (2020); Reddy and Knight (2011), and much other work,
we assume that there are two “languages” in the manuscript, referred to as Voynich A
and Voynich B. More precisely, there are two methods of encoding at least one natural
language. While we use the term “language” here (following convention), it is not clear
that the differences between them are because of different underlying languages or varieties
(though this is possible). The main differences between them are in word frequency (which
we discuss below). Certain character sequences are very common in Language A (ol ol and
or or) and relatively uncommon in Language B, and vice versa (dy dy). We do not address
the connection between the two languages extensively here but we do treat the two varieties
separately for analytical purposes. Note that there is isomorphism between Davis’ hands
and Currier’s languages, with scribe 1 writing in Language A and Scribes 2, 3, 4 and 5 in
Language B.
2 PHONOLOGY AND GRAPHOLOGY
2.1 Scripts in the Voynich Manuscript
The Voynich Manuscript does not only contain Voynichese. While this article focuses on the
material in the manuscript in the Voynich script, there instances of other orthographies: the
Occitan month names in the Zodiac pages (f70v–73v), the partially obscured phrase in Latin
script at the end of the manuscript (f116v), or the now invisible signature of de Tepenec on
the first page (cf. Skinner et al., 2017). We note that page numbers were added after the
composition of the manuscript but those numbers do not feature in our discussion here.
5We tested this point in an undergraduate class and found that beyond about 100 words, the task of
writing language-like non-language is very diﬀicult. It is too easy to make local repetitions and words from
other languages.
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
For the purposes of examining properties of Voynichese, we use a conventionalized 1:1
mapping between Voynich characters and ascii characters known as EVA or ‘Extended Voyn-
ich Alphabet’ (in Takahashi’s digital transcription; see Zandbergen 2020 and Table 1 below).
The purpose of the transliteration is to make it possible to investigate the text using sta-
tistical methods. However, we recognize that this mapping is a simplification and that
we cannot properly draw conclusions about the phonological structure of Voynichese with-
out understanding the structure of the orthography. At present, however, the Takahashi
transcription is the only possibility for textual analysis using computational methods. We
recognize that this limits the conclusions we can draw.
2.2 The script
The Voynich script includes Latin characters from several traditions, including Carolingian
andBeneventan(seefurtherClemensandGraham2007), numerals, andcharactersthathave
no counterpart in other manuscripts except perhaps as ornamental flourishes (see Cappelli
1899, plate x and Figure 2). Some Voynich characters are clearly part of the Latin alphabet
(including a, i, o, e). Others closely resemble numbers: cf. q, d, y. Others appear to
have no parallels in other scripts, including t, f, k, p. These characters are known as
“gallows”charactersinwritingsontheVoynichscript(becauseoftheirsuperficialappearance
to gallows). The best known parallel of these characters at present are the ornaments
described in Cappelli (1899, Plate IV). While the ornamental characters in Cappelli are
ligatures created from joining digraphs together, no such assumption can be made about the
Voynich gallows characters at present. The other type of character is known as a “bench”
cH, Sh because it looks something like a bench.
In addition to the characters discussed here, there are other forms which appear only
once or twice (or a few times) in the manuscript (cf. Davis, 2020, 170). The most common
of these is the alchemical symbol x.
Figure 2: Gallows-like characters as in Cappelli (1899, Tavulo IV)
There are 21 or 22 common glyphs, plus approximately that many rarer character forms.
The total number of glyphs in the dataset depends heavily on how one classifies the variable
shapes of the graphemes. For example, there are two common transliterations in use, EVA
and v101, which each use different characters. We use EVA here because it is both the most
widely used and the basis for the machine readable transliterations on which our statistic
work in following sections depends.
EVA (an acronym for the ‘Extensible Voynich Alphabet’ (formerly European Voynich
Alphabet) represents each Voynich letter with an ASCII character. It was designed to
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
produce machine readable versions of the text and is now widely used. The mappings of
the Voynich to ASCII characters were based on Glen Claston’s assumptions about what
characters in the Latin alphabet the Voynich characters might be closest to (Zandbergen,
2020). For example, d is transliterated in EVA as d. The transliteration equivalents are
heavily influenced by European/Latinate considerations. For example, the sequence qo is
represented as qo in large part because q never appears in the text except before o, which is
reminiscent of the distribution of q never appearing except before u in Latin. But there is
no other independent reason for assuming that Voynich q is Latin script q.
trans glyph trans glyph
’ ' l l
a a m m
c c n n
d d o o
e e p p
f f q q
g g r r
h h s s
i i t t
k k v v
x x y y
combined characters
ch ch Sh Sh
cFh cFh cTh cTh
cPh cPh cKh cKh
Table 1: List of most common Voynich characters
In our opinion, EVA probably under-differentiates characters (grouping together two
variants of d, for example). It also creates digraphs from characters that may be better
understood as a single glyph. EVA ch ch, for example, is comprised of two distinct com-
ponents: c and h (rendered in ascii as ch), even though h is never found separately, and
c is otherwise identical to e. It is, however, the transcription system which is used in the
machine-readable version of the Voynich Manuscript, so we adopt it here pending a thorough
review of the transcription system.
Figure 3: Cappelli (1982, 18): apostrophe used as an abbreviation character; compare Voyn-
ich Sh
Some characters occur both in combination and separately in the manuscript. The
“benches” character ch combines with the “gallows” characters to form cTh, cKh, cFh
7

=== PAGE 8 ===
and cPh. The characters ch and Sh appear to be distinguished only by the plume over the
bench. This plume is reminiscent of the character used for abbreviations in many medieval
manuscripts, as illustrated in Figure 3. This same ligature may also distinguish c and s. d
and o appear to be distinguished by a downward stroke. However, it is not known whether
these are chance similarities (compare the relationship between the Latin characters o, b and
d) or display some underlying principle of regularity in the script.
Finally, note that although the EVA transliterations makes Voynich material easy to
pronounce, it has no basis beyond some similarity with some of the letters in the VMS
script. For example, using gallows transcriptions as f, k, t, and p is purely a convention.
2.3 Phonology and orthography
In this section we consider the “phonology” of the linguistic system underlying the Voynich
Manuscript. The examination conducted here is not phonology in the purely linguistic sense,
of course, since we have no knowledge of the abstract sound organization represented by the
orthography, nor what the relationship between the orthography and the phonology (proper)
is. However, we can draw some conclusions about the representation of the linguistic system
in comparison to orthographic representations of other languages.
2.3.1 Vowels vs consonants
Both Reddy and Knight (2011) and Guy (1991) discuss whether the Voynich writing system
is an alphabet, containing both vowels and consonants, or an abjad (representing consonants
only). One test for this uses the Sukhotin algorithm (Guy, 1991). The algorithm works on
the premise that in most (if not all) natural languages, vowels are more likely to be adjacent
to consonants than to other vowels. That is, syllables of the shape CV or CVC are more
common than those of the form V or VC. The algorithm computes an adjacency matrix
for all characters. One successively sums the rows, assumes the most frequently occurring
segment is a vowel, and then removes twice the number of occurrences from the adjacency
matrix. One continues identifying potential vowels until no positive sums remain.
For Voynichese overall, the Sukhotin algorithm identifies 4 vowels: a, o, e, and i (that is,
a, o, e, i). It is worth noting that 3 of these characters (a, o, i) appear similar to characters
which represent vowels in the Latin alphabet. The fourth, c, is the most common character
in the Voynich alphabet.
Some additional issues remain. First, the Sukhotin algorithm is sensitive to whether
word breaks are included in the calculations. When word breaks are excluded, the characters
identified as vowels are instead a, g, c, n, o, y. That is, i is no longer identified as a vowel,
and three characters that are almost exclusively word final are identified (g, n, y). Secondly,
different characters are identified between the two Voynich Languages, A and B.
Reddy and Knight (2011) argue that Voynichese shows more properties of an abjad than
an alphabetic script. They argue this in part from the induction of character classes from
clustering behavior of characters. They use a two-state bigram Hidden Markov Model over
letters in Voynichese, and then induce two classes. For alphabets, these classes usually
correspond to consonants and vowels. For Voynichese, however, the two classes correspond
to the final character in the word versus the rest of the word. However, this result could be
8

=== PAGE 9 ===
driven primarily by the characters which are only found word finally (such as m, n, g, and v).
That is, the result may not indicate the Voynich script is an abjad, but rather that there are
positional variants for character forms. Furthermore, though the Sukhotin algorithm does
pick out both consonants and vowels in abjads, in abjad scripts not all words contain one of
the vocalic characters (even though all words contain a vowel phonemically). In Voynichese,
almost all words in MS408 have one of the characters picked out by the Sukhotin algorithm
as vowels.6
2.3.2 Character entropy
The information entropy of a text can be thought of as the amount of unpredictability or
disorder present in the text. Character-level entropy defines the average amount of informa-
tion carried by a single character (usually measured in bits, or “shannons”). The concept
was introduced by Shannon (1949) and arises in the field of information theory, in which it is
important for measuring the theoretical rate of information transmission. Character entropy
is another metric by which we can compare languages to each other and to Voynichese.
Bennett (1976) noted the unusual nature of the Voynich script in his discussion of condi-
tional character entropy (also known as second-order character entropy or h2). Conditional
character entropy can be thought of as the overall predictability of a letter given the pre-
ceding letter. For example, in English texts the letter q is almost invariably followed by u.
The conditional probability of the bigram qu (the probability of u given that the previous
letter is q) is close to 1. The overall conditional entropy is calculated from the conditional
probabilities of each bigram, weighted by their overall occurrence in the text, as in (1):
(1)
∑ P(y )
H(X|Y) = P(x ,y )log j
i j 2 P(x ,y )
i,j i j
Bennett compared the Voynich manuscript to texts in four modern European languages,
andfoundconditionalentropyinVoynichesetobemuchsmaller. Thatis,charactersequences
withinthewordsinVoynichtextareunusuallypredictablecomparedtoEuropeanlanguages.
Voynich characters appear in unusually predictable sequences, with certain characters being
found at the beginning or end of the word or only after certain characters. Bennett found
the Voynich character entropy to be comparable to Hawaiian and other Polynesian languages
with small phoneme inventories and limited syllable shapes. However, Stallings (1998) notes
that Bennett’s Hawaiian text used a simplified orthography that did not distinguish long
vowels or glottal stops, which would have the effect of decreasing entropy.
In fact, the Voynich text in the EVA transcription is significantly lower than any other
language text in our sample. Figure 4 shows the conditional character entropy (h2) and
character set size for 250 languages in the sample, coded for type of script.7 In Figure 4,
6Furthermore, character entropy, as discussed in §2.3.2 following, is usually higher for abjads than for
alphabetic scripts. For Voynichese, the entropy is lower.
7Thischartisrestrictedtolanguageswrittenwithalphabets(Latin,Cyrillic,Gothic,Georgian)orabjads
(Hebrew, Arabic, Syriac). Alphasyllabaries like Devanagari have a greater character set size but a similar
h2. Logograms like Chinese have a much greater character set size and a much higher conditional entropy.
All the lowest conditional entropy languages are written with alphabets.
9

=== PAGE 10 ===
Voynichese (A, B, and full sample with rare characters included) is much lower than any of
the natural language samples.
Figure 4: Conditional Character Entropy vs number of characters for Voynichese and other
languages
TheentropyofVoynicheseisunlikeanyotherlanguageorscript. Plausiblemanipulations
ofthescriptwereinvestigated, includingvariousshorthandabbreviationsanddevowelingthe
script. These do affect the character entropy, but not to the extent that would be required
to bring Voynichese to the level of other languages. The only manipulation of this type
that brings the conditional entropy to Voynich levels is systematic conflation of phonemic
distinctions, such as conflating all vowels to a single character, recoding based on dividing
characters into whether they occur in the first or second half of the alphabet, or sorting all
characters in the word into alphabetical order.
It is worth noting that values for conditional entropy are, to some extent, affected by how
characters are divided. For example, if q and o are treated as separate characters, Entropy is
not (fully) a function of misdividing characters. Changing the character divisions can lower
the entropy, but not to the levels seen in Voynichese. Thus the very low conditional entropy
values are not simply a result of misparsing Voynich characters.
Entropy is also not a function of abbreviated coding, at least using the common abbrevi-
ations that scribes used. Conditional entropy of abbreviated texts is actually slightly higher
(3.4 for the abreviated text of the Latin Secreta Secretorum, rather than 3.2 for the plain
text version of the same work).
Thus in summary, Voynichese has much lower conditional entropy than other texts and
languages to which it was compared. It is not a function of script transliteration. However,
it may provide a clue to the type of encipherment used.
10

=== PAGE 11 ===
3 WORD LEVEL MORPHOLOGY
3.1 Evidence for words
Some textual traditions use spaces to visually separate words from each other, while other
traditions consist of running text without spaces to indicate word boundaries. The Voynich
manuscript contains spaces which separate the text into word-sized chunks. If we make
the assumption that these chunks do in fact represent words, then we can investigate the
morphology of Voynichese. That is, we can see if there is evidence for internal structure to
Voynichwordssuchasprefixesandsuﬀixeswhichcouldrepresentgrammaticalpropertieslike
case or agreement. We can also look at the word as an atomic unit and examine word-level
patterns that abstract away from character-level issues.
Figure 5: Example of a Voynich paragraph with word breaks. Credit: Beinecke Rare Book
and Manuscript Library, Yale University
There is sometimes diﬀiculty in telling where the breaks are. For example, in Figure 5
the last two characters of the middle line, dy, are more set off from the characters that come
before them compared to the word directly below, which ends in the same sequence. We
could therefore either treat dy as a separate (short) word or as part of the preceding word
with an unusual gap. Despite ambiguities like this, however, there are consistent patterns
about word structure which can be deduced with the assumptions that visual spaces are
word breaks.
3.2 Structure in Voynich Words
Many Voynich characters and character combinations are restricted to certain parts of the
word. Tiltman (1950) (quoted by D’Imperio, 1978) proposed that Voynich words consist of
three separate “fields”, with particular symbols occurring at either the beginning, middle or
end of the word. The subsequent proposals and analyses of Roe (1997), Stolfi (2005), Reddy
and Knight (2011), and Palmer (2014) differ in complexity and coverage, but they main-
tain this basic notion that there are separate fields for particular characters and character
combinations.
Here are a few of the most common character combinations in each field:
1. Prefixes:8 qo- qo, o- o, y- y, ch- ch, sh- Sh, d- d
8Thefirstthreeprefixesareusuallyfollowedbyagallowscharacter(pp,tt,kk,ff),whereastheothers
are not. Some words instead begin with a “bench-and-gallows” combination (cph cPh, cth cTh, ckh cKh,
cfh cFh).
11

=== PAGE 12 ===
2. Roots/Midfixes: p p, t t, k k, f f, e e, ee ee, o o, a a
3. Suﬀixes: -y y, -dy dy, -l l, -r r, -m m, -iin iin, -in in
This structure is similar in all words in all sections of the manuscript and in both Lan-
guage A and Language B. There is some minor variation in the frequency of particular aﬀixes
between A and B. Most significantly, Language B has a higher frequency of both the qo-
(qo) prefix and the -dy (dy) suﬀix (they are about two times and three times more common,
respectively).9
Unlike other textual traditions, many characters and character combinations are found
exclusively in one of the three character fields. This is the ultimate source of the unusually
low conditional character entropy (h2) in Voynich. The text is highly predictable because
certain letters only occur in certain parts of the word and in a relatively small number
of different combinations. For example, Voynich A has a somewhat higher h2 (2.17) than
Voynich B (2.01). This is largely due to the increased frequency of qo- qo and -dy dy aﬀixes
mentioned above. If we delete these two aﬀixes from both texts, then the h2 of Voynich A
and Voynich B become nearly identical (2.23 and 2.24 respectively).
As discussed above, certain characters appear exclusively or almost exclusively at the
beginning(q q)orend(mm, gg, rr, nn)ofwords. Theclosestexampletothisphenomenon
in other texts are abjads like Arabic and Hebrew which contain a small number of glyph
variants that only occur word finally. The distributions of characters in bigrams are given
in Figure 6.
Figure 6: Frequency of each Voynich Character given the previous character
In practice, it can be diﬀicult to disentangle hypotheses about word structure from hy-
potheses about the script. For example, the very common word-final sequence -iin iin is
9Furthermore, as opposed to running text, labels tend to lack the qo- qo prefix, which may be evidence
that it encodes a grammatical property like inflection or agreement.
12

=== PAGE 13 ===
three separate characters in the EVA transcription but only one character in the Currier
transcription. If it is a sequence of multiple characters, then it most likely represents an
entire suﬀix. If it is a single character, then it may not.
3.3 Distribution of Words in the Manuscript
Currier(1976)notedthatcertainfrequentwordformsrecurthroughouttheVoynichManuscript.
However, themostcommonwordsdifferbetweenLanguageAandLanguageB.Figure2gives
the ten most common words in Voynich A and Voynich B, along with their proportional fre-
quencies.
A B
daiin daiin 4.5% chedy chedy 2.1%
chol chol 2.5% ol ol 1.8%
chor chor 1.6% shedy Shedy 1.8%
s s 1.4% aiin aiin 1.5%
dy dy 1.1% daiin daiin 1.4%
shol Shol 1.0% qokeedy qokeedy 1.3%
sho Sho 0.9% qokain qokain 1.2%
chy chy 0.9% qokedy qokedy 1.2%
cthy cThy 0.9% qokeey qokeey 1.1%
ol ol 0.9% chey chey 1.0%
TOTAL 15.7% TOTAL 14.5%
Table 2: Most common Voynich words in Languages A and B
While there is some overlap, the most common vocabulary items of Voynich A and
Voynich B are substantially different. While the words in both languages are built from the
same three-field structure, they do not clearly correspond to each other. They might be the
result of different encoding processes, or they might represent different underlying natural
languages.
Significantly, both Landini (2001) and Reddy and Knight (2011) note that the distribu-
tion of words in the Voynich manuscript follows Zipf’s Law. This is a power law that relates
the frequency of a word with its rank. Thus if we rank each word by frequency count, we
expect the second word to be roughly half as frequent as the first word, and the third word
to be a third as frequent as the first word. A chart of frequency by word rank depicts a
characteristic Zipf curve. Figure 7 compares the distribution curves of the first 100 words in
Voynich and four other languages, with frequency given as a percentage of the most common
word (e.g. word 2 in Occitan is 43% as frequent as word 1, word 3 is 40% as frequent as
word 1, and so on).
Both Voynich languages follow a Zipfian distribution. Voynich B is a clear outlier in this
sample, largely because its three most common words are of approximately equal frequency.
It is possible that chedy chedy and shedy Shedy represent the same word, as they are
distinguished only by whether there is a plume stroke over the bench character. If we make
13

=== PAGE 14 ===
Figure 7: Word Frequency Distribution of Voynich and Selected Languages
this assumption (represented in Figure 7 as ‘Voynich B (Modified)’), Voynich B is less of an
outlier.
Zipf’s law was originally formulated to describe word distributions in natural language
corpora, although it has been found to apply to various other social phenomena. The fact
that Voynich word frequencies follow a Zipfian distribution does not prove that the text is
linguistically meaningful. But the word distribution does not look highly unusual in com-
parison to natural languages, which we might expect if the text is naively created gibberish.
As Reddy and Knight comment, a Zipfian distribution “is a necessary (though not suﬀicient)
test of linguistic plausibility.”
Furthermore, if we believe Voynich to be an encoded form of natural language, any
hypothesis about encoding must take into account the fact that the Zipfian distribution
is preserved. Some forms of encoding will have the effect of diminishing or eliminating
the distribution, while others will not. For example, encipherment methods which rotate
alphabets will flatten the frequency of the most common lexical items, since those words will
be enciphered differently on different pages. Whatever the method used to encipher the The
Voynich Manuscript languages, it is most likely to be consistent within each “language”.
The proportional frequencies of the most common words in linguistic texts are also useful
for diagnosing linguistic structure. The most common word in Voynich A, daiin daiin,
accounts for 4.5% of the words in that text, while the most common word in Voynich B,
chedy chedy, takes up 2.1%. These proportional frequencies are well within the expected
range for most natural languages. The most common word in many natural languages is a
definite article like ‘the’, a connective like ‘and’, or a preposition like ‘in’/’of’. In Voynich A,
daiin daiin is never found at the beginning of a paragraph, which may suggest that it is a
connective.
The proportional frequency of the top ten most common words together is also within
14

=== PAGE 15 ===
the range we find with natural languages. For Voynich A this is 15.7% and for Voynich B
this is 14.5%. Figure 8 shows this for 101 languages in seven different language families. The
red lines show one standard deviation from the mean.
Figure 8: Proportional frequency of the ten most frequent words by Language Family
The Voynich languages are within the range of each of these families, and closest to the
averageforSemitic, Iranian, andGermanic. Notethatthereisaninversecorrelationbetween
this statistic and morphological complexity. The percentage will tend to be lower with
languages that have many words with complex morphological structure, as with languages
in the Turkic, Kartvelian, and Dravidian families. It will tend to be higher in languages with
less morphological complexity, as in the Romance family. While this statistic alone is not
exact enough to match Voynich to a particular language family, it suggests that Voynichese
has a medium level of morphological complexity.
3.4 Moving average type token ratio (MATTR)
Another statistic which is useful for determining the lexical diversity of a text is the type-
token ratio. Languages with greater morphological complexity typically have higher type-
token ratios as the number of distinct types approaches the number of overall tokens in a
text. However, this statistic is heavily dependent on the length of the text. Gheuens (2019)
introduced the Moving Average Type Token ratio (MATTR) index, which takes the average
TTRoverasetwordwindow, asawaytomeasurelexicaldiversityirrespectiveoftextlength.
Gheuens (2019) examined MATTR in Voynichese compared with a sample of language texts,
and concluded that 2000 is an ideal window. We have also found 2000 words to be a good
window for comparing MATTR in language families.
Figure 9 shows the MATTR summaries across language families. Here the families with
higher morphological complexity, like Dravidian and Kartvelian, have higher MATTR ratios.
15

=== PAGE 16 ===
The Voynich texts are once again in the medium range, and closest to Iranian, Germanic,
and Romance.
Figure 9: MATTR by Language Family
The MATTR and proportional frequency measures provide distinct and largely comple-
mentary evidence that Voynichese represents a language with medium morphological com-
plexity. Voynich most closely resembles the averages for Germanic and Iranian, and least
resembles those for Turkic, Dravidian, and Kartvelian. As with the Zipfian word distribu-
tion, we find Voynich to be well within the expected values for natural language texts, and
far from random gibberish. If the Voynich text is meaningless, its creators mimicked natural
language in a sophisticated way.
These measures are useful for our purposes because they allow us to narrow down pos-
sible languages without knowing the meaning of any of the words in Voynich. They are
also largely independent of character-level parsing and transcription issues. Assuming the
transcription style is consistent, the word distributions will be identical even if there are
incorrect assumptions about character boundaries and the relationships between characters
and phonemes.
4 GENERALIZATIONS ABOVE THE WORD LEVEL
The Voynich Manuscript text can be examined at multiple levels above the unit of the word.
One major division is between text that appears as labels on drawings and running text. In
the running text there are word combinations and Voynich “phrases” which give evidence of
syntactic structure. The text is written line-by-line, which may roughly equate to a sentence
(Currier, 1976). Blocks of running text are separated into paragraphs, which could indicate
a shift in topic. Above this level, each folio can be examined separately. The distinction
16

=== PAGE 17 ===
between Voynich A and Voynich B is made at the folio level, as are (with one exception) the
Voynichhands(Davis,2020). Finally, therearethedifferentsectionsofthemanuscriptwhich
are distinguished by subject matter as evident by the illustrations or diagrams depicted on
the page.
Just as there is clear evidence of structure and patterning at the character level and at
the word level, there are patterns at each of these higher levels of structure. These highest
levels have received the least amount of attention by researchers.
4.1 Line and Paragraph
Currier (1976) argued that the line itself should be treated as a meaningful unit because
certain Voynich characters and character combinations tend to be found at either the begin-
ning or the end of the line. There are also certain characters that precede the first word in
a paragraph.
One hypothesis is that these patterns originate in the underlying linguistic structure of
the text. If we assume that a line of text roughly corresponds to a sentence, then certain
types of words will tend to appear at the edges of the line. For example, the first word of a
line might consist of a noun or definite article. If Voynichese represents a verb-final language,
then we might see certain character combinations that are uniquely associated with verbal
morphology like tense and agreement appearing more frequently in the last word of the line.
Another hypothesis is that these patterns are typographical in nature. In other words,
the same word will be written differently depending on where it appears in the line. In this
case we should expect to find pairs of similarly patterning Voynich words which occur in
different places along the line. Indeed Montemurro et al. (2013) suggest that some similar
words have “aﬀinities” in the text, in that they have similar patterns of occurrence.
The clearest example of this phenomenon is the paragraph, which usually begins with a
gallows character. 85% of the paragraphs in the text begin with one of t, k, f, p. These
“gallows-initial” words are (1) otherwise fairly infrequent; and (2) have the same structure as
normalVoynichwordsexceptthat theyareprecededbya gallowscharacter. John Grovefirst
hypothesized that gallows-initial words were variants of other words because of the many
minimal pairs between common paragraph-initial words and the most frequent words in the
entire text: tchor/chor tchor/chor, pol/ol pol/ol, and tchedy/chedy tchedy/chedy. In
other words, the gallows characters do not appear to be part of the word itself. They simply
mark the beginning of the paragraph. Furthermore gallows-initial words, when they do
appear elsewhere, usually begin with k k or f f rather than p p or t t. This may suggest
sub-ordering of elements within the paragraph itself.
There is a similar but less robust pattern associated with the beginning of each line. The
first word is somewhat more likely to begin with s- s. This may be another orthographic
variant, but it appears to only occur with words that otherwise begin with o- o or a- a. Thus
aiin aiin, ol ol, and or or are replaced with saiin saiin, sol sol, and sor sor.
There are also characters which usually appear at the end of the last word of the line,
particularlymmandtheinfrequentcharactergg. Itisplausiblethatmmandggarevariant
forms of the word-final glyphs -iin iin and -y y. For example, some of the most common
words in line-final position include dam dam and am am, which appear to be counterparts
17

=== PAGE 18 ===
of the very frequent words daiin daiin and aiin aiin. Similarly, there are several minimal
pairs of -g g and -y y words between line-final position and elsewhere: g/y g/y, alg/aly
alg/aly, dairodg/dairody dairodg/dairody, and arg/ary arg/ary. However, if this is an
orthographic convention, it is not applied in a consistent manner: the forms -iin iin and -y
y are also found line-finally, albeit somewhat less frequently.
These generalizations are evident from Table 3, which shows the five most common words
ineachposition. Therearesomeexceptions, however, particularlywiththeworddaiin daiin,
which is common in every position except paragraph-initially.10 The table combines word
counts from Voynich A and Voynich B. These overall patterns are found in both languages,
although there are slight differences. For example, paragraphs in B are more commonly
marked by the p p gallows.
Paragraph-initial Line-initial Line-final Everywhere
pol (pol) daiin (daiin) daiin (daiin) daiin (daiin)
tchedy (tchedy) saiin (saiin) dy (dy) ol (ol)
polaiin (polaiin) dain (dain) dam (dam) chedy (chedy)
tol (tol) sol (sol) am (am) aiin (aiin)
pchedar (pchedar) sor (sor) dal (dal) shedy (Shedy)
Table 3: Most common Voynich words by Position
All of these observations lead to generalizations which appear to be typographical rather
than linguistic in nature. Voynich writing does not appear to have any conventional punc-
tuation symbols, but rather uses character variants and appended characters to structure
the text in a way that is similar to punctuation. A comprehensive linguistic analysis needs
to take seriously the possibility that, for example, paiin paiin, saiin saiin, aiin aiin, and am
am are all positional variants of the same word.
4.2 Phrases
Syntax describes the ways that words fit together in a hierarchical structure, and general-
izations about word and phrase combinations can explicate this structure. This has been
studiedlesssystematicallythancharacterandword-levelpatternsintheVoynichManuscript,
where the focus has been on character interpretation or hypotheses about whether Voynich
represents a natural language. Here we can simply present a few observations and their
potential implications for syntactic structure.
Stolfi (2005) points to the repetitive nature of the Voynich text as evidence that it is not
meaningful. Take for example the following line from Voynich B:
(2) keedy qokeedy qokey okar otar dar dar dy.
keedy qokeedy qokey okar otar dar dar dy
10daiin daiin is never found as the first word of the paragraph, and there are only two possible examples
of pdaiin pdaiin.
18

=== PAGE 19 ===
This repetitiveness is at least partly the result of the relatively limited set of character
combinations and the predictable structure of Voynich words. Full reduplication, in which
the entire word is repeated, is also common in Voynich. However, it is still within the realm
of plausibility for natural language texts. In Voynich A each word has a 0.84% chance of
repeating while in Voynich B that chance is 0.94%. The range among the samples in our
language corpus is 0.02%-4.8%, with an average of 0.63%.11
There are a few generalizations about multi-word structures which may provide evidence
ofsyntacticstructureinthemanuscript. ThefirstholdsforLanguageBbutnotforLanguage
A. A word that begins with qo- qo is usually preceded by a word that ends with -y y (e.g.
shedyqokeedy, odyqokaiin, qokeedyqokedyShedyqokeedy, odyqokaiin, qokeedyqokedy).
This might indicate some form of agreement or a compound verb structure.
The next generalization holds for both languages, and involves the fourth most common
word overall, aiin aiin. This word is usually preceded by a short one or two-letter word (e.g.
ar aiin, or aiin, s aiin ar aiin, or aiin, s aiin). Short words tend to be the most common
words in natural language texts, but the most common Voynich words are four or five letters.
The short words may represent articles or prepositions, although identification with parts of
speech cannot be accomplished at this stage.
Another possible multi-word structure involves gallows characters, which are most com-
monly preceded by o- o (e.g. okeedy, otaiin, opchy, ofchedy okeedy, otaiin, opchy,
ofchedy). These words are prevalent on labels, and they occur with roughly the frequency
we expect to find nouns in the text. Furthermore, there are four gallows characters, two
common (k/t k/t) and two uncommon (p/f p/f), which led us to hypothesize that they
represent a two-by-two article classification similar to that of many Romance languages.
Giventheirfrequencyofoccurrence(andthepreponderanceoffemininenounsinmedieval
philosophical texts), we would expect ok- ok to be feminine singular, ot- ot to be masculine
singular, op- op to be feminine plural, and of- of to be masculine plural. This hypothesis
predicts that most “roots” (i.e. -eedy, -aiin, -chy, -chedy) will be associated with only one
common gallows and one uncommon gallows symbol. Relatively few words will take both
masculine and feminine marking. However, this prediction is not born out. All roots pattern
roughly the same, and most are found with every possible combination: okaiin, otaiin,
opaiin, ofaiin okaiin, otaiin, opaiin, ofaiin. Therefore, the hypothesis that the elements in
question represent an article classification similar to Romance is untenable.
If these gallows sequences do represent articles, the different gallows characters might
changebasedontheunderlyingroot,aswefindthedefinitearticleassimilatingphonologically
to the noun in Arabic speech (although this is not expressed in writing). We do find certain
constraints on what can follow gallows characters. For example, p/f p/f are never followed
by e e, and almost never by i i or l l.
11However, the average for most relevant language families is somewhat smaller: Germanic is 0.37%,
Romance is 0.36%, Iranian is 0.25%, and Semitic is 0.36%.
19

=== PAGE 20 ===
4.3 Topic
Reddy and Knight (2011), Montemurro et al. (2013) and Amancio et al. (2013) discuss
Voynich topic modeling. That is, they use techniques from automatic text summation or
keyword identification to group together similar pages of the manuscript. Reddy and Knight
(2011) show that the The Voynich Manuscript has a number of properties that are consistent
with natural language and inconsistent with a hoax. For example, the pages that are nearest
neighbors in topic modeling tend to be adjacent to one another in the manuscript.
Montemurro et al. (2013) use techniques from information theory to identify the words
which are most likely to contribute to topics in texts. That is, they identify words which
are more uniformly distributed throughout the The Voynich Manuscript and compare them
to those which tend to cluster. Those which tend to cluster are more likely to provide
information about the subject matter of the pages. Their method also returns an overall
similarity between the pages with herbal and pharmacological illustrations, suggesting that
the illustrations in each part of the text are relevant to the linguistic text in each section.
Amancio et al. (2013) also evaluate the discourse properties of the The Voynich Manuscript
and conclude that the Manuscript is most likely natural language thematic content.
Sterneck and Bowern (2020) further investigated topic modeling within the Voynich text
and the relationships between Languages, scribal hands, and thematic material (as deduced
from the illustrations). They used TF-IDF12 weighted counts using 40 word chunks of text
within each page; they use Nonnegative Matrix Factorization (NMF) topic clustering to
cluster Voynich pages, and to compare those clusters to other types of structure in the
document.
Using different methods from Amancio et al. (2013) and Reddy and Knight (2011), they
were able to recover both general thematic topics and identify correlations between topics
and hands within thematic sections. That is, the pages that Davis (2020) identified as being
written by a different scribe also tend to emerge as a different ‘topic’ in the TD-IDF analysis.
Figure 10 illustrates the topic, hand, and section clustering.
This suggests that different scribes may have used different encipherment strategies or
written about different subjects.
5 LINGUISTIC IDENTIFICATION
Finally, we briefly survey the general theories that have been advanced as to what language
underlies MS408. The manuscript was undecipherable even in the 17th Century. Athanasius
Kircher13 (Neal, 2017) thought it was likely written in the Glagolitic script (“Illyrian”), and
12TF-IDF stands for Term Frequency - Inverse Document Frequency is a statistic used to cluster text
based on the frequency of words in the text itself (the TF) as compared to the frequency of that word in
the document as a whole. It allows us to group together texts based on distinctive words. Because Voynich
pages are texts of different lengths, Sterneck and Bowern (2020) normalized the text length for each page.
13ThesourceofthisobservationisaletterfromKirchertoTheodorMoretus(amathematician)inMarch,
1639. The relevant passage is Alterum denique folium quod ipsi ignoto characteri genere scriptum uide-
batur illyrico idiomate, charactere quem D. Hieronymi uulgo uocant, impressum sciat; utunturque eodem
charactere hic Romae in missalibus alijsque sacris libris illyrico sermone imprimendis. Neal’s 2017 is as
follows: “Finally,Icanletyouknowthattheothersheetwhichappearedtobewritteninthesameunknown
20

=== PAGE 21 ===
indeed there are certain similarities but not more than one might expect given the common
origin of Glagolitic and Latin scripts (see also Bennett 1976). Others have assumed that
the Voynich Manuscript is in either Latin or a Romance language, and given the widespread
use of Latin as a lingua franca in Europe throughout this period, it is not an unreasonable
guess. Reddy and Knight (2011) suggest that aspects of the script is reminiscent of an abjad,
which would suggest a Semitic language (since all abjads currently known are used to write
Semitic languages). This was the inspiration for Hauer and Kondrak (2016), who claim that
the manuscript is in an enciphered and anagrammed Hebrew; their solution, however, is not
generally accepted.
In this section we survey some of the theories regarding the language underlying Voyn-
ichese. We make no attempt to be comprehensive, and all have substantial conceptual
problems.14
Current Voynich language theories fall into a number of methodological traps. They
“decode” based on a hunch. It is striking how many claimed decipherments emphasize how
the solution came to the authors or stood out to them from cursory examination of the
text. They exhibit a strong confirmation bias, omitting any information that does not fit
the theory they propose. Secondly, these theories typically present very small amounts of
data. For example, Gibbs’ (2017) Latin “translation” was published with a single line, as
was Hauer and Kondrak (2016). When they discuss the data, they focus almost entirely on
the lexicon, ignoring morphology and syntax. This is problematic if the presumption is that
the manuscript was written by authors fluent in the language.
5.1 Latin or Romance
Several previous claims are based around Voynichese being Romance, most likely a Latin
cipher but possibly a vernacular variety. Cheshire (2018) argues that the language is “Proto-
Romance”, though it is unclear whether he intends the ancestral language of contemporary
Romance languages or a lingua franca based on Romance sources. D’Imperio (1978) sug-
gested that Latin is most likely, simply given the status of Latin as the language of learned
discourse at the time.
Gibbs (2017) suggests that the manuscript is a type of abbreviated Latin. That is, he
decodes the plant pages as a set of recipes based on medieval medicinal shorthand. Only two
lines have been published, and nothing about it an be regarded as convincing. Gibbs does
not use abbreviations in the way that medieval Latin writers abbreviate; the Latin is itself
not grammatically correct, and it doesn’t generalize to the parts of the manuscript which
are not about plants. In short, it is deeply unconvincing.
script is printed in the Illyrian language in the script commonly called St Jerome’s, and they use the same
script here in Rome to print missals and other holy books in the Illyrian language.” Both are given at
http://www.voynich.nu/letters.html
14Other claims include Greek, Estonian, and various mixed language hypotheses. Skinner et al. (2017,
31–32) discusses and dismisses several other theories.
21

=== PAGE 22 ===
5.2 Hebrew
ThemainworkarguingforHebrewunderlyingtheVoynichManuscriptisHauerandKondrak
(2016), following an earlier suggestion by Reddy and Knight (2011) that the Voynich script
is an abjad. Hauer and Kondrak (2016) assume that the Voynich manuscript is written in
a monoalphabetic substitution cipher; they also allow the possibility that it is written in a
consonantal script (that is, an abjad) and that there is possible anagramming within words.
Inorderto createan encryptionkey, theauthorscompare wordsbythefrequencyof repeated
symbols within words (e.g. a word such as ‘seems’ has two s characters, two es, and one m).
A substitution cipher based on optimized frequency matching with 380 languages suggests
that the language with the closest distribution of anagrammed word patterns is Hebrew.
Hauer and Kondrak (2016) attempted to decipher the first ten pages of the manuscript
basedontheanagrammeddictionariestheycreated. Theywerenot,however,abletoproduce
anysentences“thatweregrammaticallycorrectorsemanticallyconsistent,”eitherforHebrew
or other languages with pattern matches in the anagram dictionary (such as abjad Latin).
We therefore also consider the Hebrew hypothesis not proven at best, and more accurately
unconvincing.
5.3 Nahuatl
Another recent suggestion is based on the interpretation of the plant images, by Janick and
Tucker (2018a,b). They point out a number of similarities between plants in Mexico and
those in the Voynich manuscript. They also claim that some plants are a better match for
Mesoamerican plants than European ones, because of details in the drawings. For example,
they argue (Tucker and Janick, 2019, 183) that the picture on page 9v is a better fit to the
American Viola bicolor than the European Viola tricolor.
The details of the pictures notwithstanding, we consider this argument a non-starter
due to the carbon dating of the manuscript. The manuscript is simply too early for a
Mesoamerican origin to be plausible. If there is an error in the carbon dating, it’s likely
to be older, not younger. The idea that the illustrations solidly reflect Europe of the early
15th century, but the plants from Mexico in 1550s, is simply implausible, especially when
we know that the plant illustrations, with cubed roots and biologically impossible details,
are unlikely to be intended as faithful representations.
The linguistic arguments are also poorly developed. No direct comparisons with Nahuatl
are made in Tucker and Janick (2018), while in the later work (e.g. Tucker and Janick, 2019)
there are some superficial and unsystematic comparisons which take no account of Nahuatl
grammar.
5.4 Bax’s unknown language
The final language to be considered here is Stephen Bax’s approach and proposed deci-
pherment of 5 words. Before his untimely death in 2017, Bax made available an 80 page
document with his progress and thoughts towards decipherment (Bax, 2014).
Bax’stechniquewasratherdifferentfromtheotherlinguisticapproachesdescribedabove.
Other authors have relied on what we might call ‘inspiration’; that is, they speak of an “aha”
22

=== PAGE 23 ===
moment where they get an idea about which language underlies the Voynich manuscript.
They then use various methods to find support for that assumption.
Bax, on the other hand, proceeds from labels and key terms, trying to use patterns in
the label names to infer readings of the script. He assumes (for the purposes of decoding)
that the grapheme and phoneme systems are isomorphic.
Bax’s hypotheses proceed based on the reading of the label near the Pleiades on Alde-
baran, the constellation Taurus (on 68v) d/toari doary, and two plant labels: oror oror
“juniper” (on 15v; cf. Arabic arar) and possibly “coriander”, which Bax reads as kooratu
keerodal.
If Bax’s provisional decipherments are correct, the language of the Voynich Manuscript is
probably Indo-European (or at least in contact with languages of the region). However, Bax
has nothing to say about some of the more odd features of the manuscript encoding, such as
the very unusual conditional entropy values. His decipherment technique, like many others,
takes the script at face value. Bax’s use of labels relies on the assumption that the first word
of the text on a page is the label for the page. This may be a reasonable assumption, but on
15v the first word is not oror but poror. It is also perhaps problematic that the illustration
on 15v, as Bax notes, doesn’t look at all like a juniper tree. If the phonemic equivalences
put forward by Bax generalize to the rest of the manuscript, we should be able to read it.
6 SUMMARY
In summary, none of these arguments are either proven or even particularly promising.
Our work argues that the character level metrics show Voynich to be unusual, while the
word and line level metrics show it to be regular natural language and within the range of a
number of plausible languages. The higher structure of the manuscript itself is completely
consistent with natural language and is very unlikely to be manufactured.
This therefore implies that the script is not structure-preserving in that the graphemes
are not one to one, but they do encode words in a regular orthography. Future work should
focus on ciphers which have these properties, and in addition create predictability in the
writing system. A further fruitful area of analysis may be the textual variation between the
different hands, or the same hands in different portions of the manuscript.
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The authors are not aware of any aﬀiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings
that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Acknowledgements, general annotations, funding. Thanks to the members of the Yale Un-
dergraduate class “The mystery of the Voynich Manuscript” (Spring, 2018 and Fall, 2019),
Ray Clemens and Lisa Fagin Davis.
23

=== PAGE 24 ===
References
Amancio, Diego R., Eduardo G. Altmann, Diego Rybski, Osvaldo N. Oliveira and Lu-
ciano F. da Costa. 2013. Probing the Statistical Properties of Unknown Texts: Appli-
cation to the Voynich Manuscript. PLoS ONE 8(7). e67310–e67310. doi:10/f48qmr. URL
http://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0067310.
Barlow, Michael. 1986. the Voynich Manuscript - By Voyn-
ich? Cryptologia 10(4). 210–216. doi:10/bz7md2. URL
http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/journals/cryptologia/cryptologia10.htmlBarlow86a.
Bax, Stephen. 2014. A proposed partial decoding of the Voynich script. University of
Bedfordshire .
Bennett, William Ralph. 1976. Scientific and engineering problem-solving with the computer.
Prentice Hall PTR.
Cappelli, Adriano. 1899. Dizionario di abbreviature latine ed italiane usate nelle carte e
codici specialmente del medio-evo. Milan: Ulrico Hoepli.
Cappelli, Adriano. 1982. The elements of abbreviation in medieval Latin paleography. Uni-
versity of Kansas libraries.
Cheshire, Gerard Edward. 2018. Linguistically dating and locating the origin of Manuscript
MS408. University of Bristol, Science Survey 2.
Clemens, Raymond and Timothy Graham. 2007. Introduction to manuscript studies. Cornell
University Press.
Clement, Richard W. 1997. Medieval and Renaissance book production. Library Faculty
and Staff Publications 10. URL http://digitalcommons.usu.edu/lib ubs.
p
Currier, Captain Prescott H. 1976. Papers on the Voynich manuscript. URL
http://www.voynich.nu/extra/img/curr ain.pdf.
m
Daruka, István. 2020. On the Voynich manuscript. Cryptologia 0(0). 1–37. doi:
10.1080/01611194.2019.1706063.
Davis, Lisa Fagin. 2020. How many glyphs and how many scribes: Digital paleography and
the Voynich manuscript. Manuscript Studies V(1). 162–178.
D’Imperio, Mary E. 1978. The Voynich manuscript: an
elegant enigma. Tech. Rep. 9780894120381. URL
http://oai.dtic.mil/oai/oai?verb=getRecordmetadataPrefix=htmlidentifier=ADA070618.
Gheuens, Koen. 2019. Type-token ratio. URL
https://herculeaf.wordpress.com/2019/05/04/type-token-ratio/. Examining
lexical diversity in the Voynich manuscript.
24

=== PAGE 25 ===
Gibbs, Nicholas. 2017. Voynich manuscript: The solution. The Times Literary Suppplement
.
Guy, Jacques B. M. 1991. Statistical properties of two folios of the Voyn-
ich manuscript. Cryptologia 15(3). 207–218. doi:10/d85gfc. URL
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/0161-119191865876.
Haeberl, C. G. 2015. Balaybalan language. Iranicaonline.org URL
http://www.iranicaonline.org/articles/balaybalan-language.
Harkness, Deborah E. 2016. The Voynich manuscript. Beinecke Rare Book & Manuscript
Library in Association with Yale University Press.
Hauer, Bradley and Grzegorz Kondrak. 2016. Decoding Anagrammed Texts
Written in an Unknown Language and Script. Transactions of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics 4. 75–86. doi:10/ggdfd6. URL
https://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/abs/10.1162/tacl 0084.
a0
Higley, S. 2007. Hildegard of Bingen’s unknown language: An edition, translation, and
discussion. Springer. Google-Books-ID: LZGJDAAAQBAJ.
Janick, Jules and Arthur O. Tucker. 2018a. Cryptological Analyses, Decoding Symbols, and
Decipherment. In Unravelling the Voynich codex, 245–262. Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-
319-77294-3 1.
1
Janick, Jules and Arthur O. Tucker. 2018b. Unraveling the Voynich Codex, Fascinating Life
Sciences. Cham: Springer International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-77294-3. URL
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-77294-3.
Kennedy, Gerry and Rob. Churchill. 2004. The Voynich manuscript: The mysterious code
that has defied interpretation for centuries. Orion publishing company.
Koc, M. 2005. Bâleybelen: İlk yapma dil. Istanbul.
Landini, Gabriel. 2001. Evidence of linguistic structure in the Voynich manuscript using
spectral analysis. Cryptologia 25(4). 275–295. doi:10/dhtvfp.
Laycock, Donald C. 2001. The complete Enochian dictionary: A dictionary of the Angelic
language as revealed to Dr. John Dee and Edward Kelley. Weiser Books.
Lindemann, Luke and Claire Bowern. 2020. Voynich manuscript linguistic analysis. arxiv.org
.
Montemurro, Marcelo A., Damián H. Zanette, F Menczer, E Munoz and AM So-
moza. 2013. Keywords and Co-Occurrence Patterns in the Voynich Manuscript: An
Information-Theoretic Analysis. PLoS ONE 8(6). e66344–e66344. doi:10/m2t. URL
http://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0066344.
Neal, Philip. 2017. Voynich sources. Http://philipneal.net/voynichsources/.
25

=== PAGE 26 ===
Reddy, Sravana and Kevin Knight. 2011. What we know about the Voynich
manuscript. Proceedings of the 5th ACL-HLT Workshop on Language Tech-
nology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and Humanities 78–86. URL
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2107647.
Rugg, Gordon. 2004. An elegant hoax? A possible solution to the
Voynich manuscript. Cryptologia 28(1). 31–46. doi:10/bf6pwp. URL
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/0161-110491892755.
Rugg, Gordon and Gavin Taylor. 2016. Hoaxing statistical features
of the Voynich Manuscript. Cryptologia 1–22. doi:10/bq22. URL
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/01611194.2016.1206753.
Shannon, Claude E. 1949. The mathematical theory of communication. Urbana: University
of Illinois Press.
Skinner, Stephen, Rafał T Prinke and René Zandbergen (eds.). 2017. The Voynich
manuscript: The world’s most mysterious and esoteric codex. ReadHowYouWant.
Stallings, Dennis. 1998. Understanding the second-order entropies of Voynich text. Ixoloxi.
com. http://ixoloxi. com/voynich/mbpaper. htm .
Sterneck, Rachel and Claire Bowern. 2020. Topic modeling in the Voynich manuscript. URL
arxiv.org.
Stolfi,Jorge.2005. VoynichManuscriptStuff. http://www.dcc.unicamp.br/stolfi/voynich.
[Online; accessed 24-April-2018].
Tiltman, John H. 1950. The Voynich manuscript: The most mysterious manuscript in the
world. URL http://www.mgh-bibliothek.de/dokumente/b/b043214.pdf.
Timm, Torsten and Andreas Schinner. 2020. A possible generating algorithm of the voynich
manuscript. Cryptologia 44(1). 1–19. doi:10/gg8ff6.
Tucker, Arthur O. and Jules Janick. 2018. Origin and Provenance of the Voynich Codex. In
Unravelling the Voynich codex, 3–39. Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-77294-3 .
1
Tucker, Arthur O. and Jules Janick. 2019. Flora of the Voynich codex: An exploration of
aztec plants. Springer Nature.
Zandbergen, Rene. 2020. Voynich ms - text analysis - transliteration of the text.
Http://www.voynich.nu/transcr.html.
26

=== PAGE 27 ===
recipes−3
botanical−1
hand−1
botanical−3
balneological−4
rose−4 rose−2
hand−2
balneological−0
hand−0
botanbiocatal−ni4cal−2
unknown−2
starred−0
hand−3
starred−2
starred−4
unknown−4
astrology−4
astrology−2
hand−4
astrology−3
Figure 10: Topic: TF/IDF generated topics matching manuscript hands and illustrated
subjects. Figure 10 illustrates a network analysis of the manuscript hands (that is, the
scribes writing the pages; in yellow circles) and the thematic sections of the manuscript (in
clear circles). The hand numbers are Davis’; the subject numbers are the topics derived
from the TF/IDF analysis. The links show the association between hands and sections.
For example, hand 4 is solely responsible for the astrology-3 topic; hand 3 contributes to
astrology, starred paragraphs, and several botanical sections.
27